---
layout: post
title: jQuery
---

## {{ page.title }}

- - - -

**Table of Contents**

*  [Summary](#summary)
    -  [Basic jQuery Example](#example)
*  [JavaScript Objects](#jsobjects)
    -  [JavaScript Structure](#jsstructure)
    -  [jQuery Structure](#jqstructure)
    -  [Document Ready](#documentready)
*  [jQuery Events](#jqevents)
    -  [mouseenter()](#mouseenter)
    -  [mouseleave()](#mouseleave)
    -  [More jQuery events](#morejqevents)
    -  [Chaining events](#chainevents)
*  [jQuery Selectors](#jqselectors)
    -  [Compound Selectors](#compoundselectors)
    -  [this Selector](#thisselector)
*  [jQuery Variables](#jqvariables)
    -  [Difference $p vs $('p')](#diffpp)
*  [Modifying HTML elements](#modifyhtmlelements)
    -  [Create HTML elements](#createhtmlelements)
    -  [Add HTML elements with append(), prepend()](#addhtmlelements)
    -  [Position HTML elements with before(), after()](#positionhtmlelements)
    -  [Remove HTML elements with empty(), remove()](#removehtmlelements)
*  [Modify CSS elements](#modifycsselements)
    -  [Add(), remove(), toggle() classes](#addremovecssclasses)
    -  [Modify height(), width()](#modifyheightwidth)
    -  [Modify general with css()](#modifycss)
*  [Modify content](#modifycontent)
    -  [Modify html elements with html()](#modifyhtml)
    -  [Modify value of elements with val()](#modifyval)
    -  [Modify with event handler on()](#modifyon)
*  [jQuery Effects](#jqeffects)
    -  [Simple effect using hide()](#hide)
    -  [Simple effect using focus()](#focus)
    -  [Complex effect using animate()](#animate)
*  [jQuery UI](#jqui)

##<a id="summary">SUMMARY</a>

jQuery is a Javascript library that helps with manipulating HTML elements.  So what does jQuery really do?  jQuery is made up of:

*  __selectors__ are used to match a set of elements in a document.  These range from simple selections to complex filtering.  For example, `"*"` to select all elements, `"#id"` to select a single element with this id attribute.
*  __events__ are used when the user interacts with the browser.  These can be document loading or  .  For example, `.load()`, `.ready()` `.click()`, `.submit()`, `.mouseenter()`, `.mouseleave()`
*  __effects__ are used to add animation to the page.  These include simple animations like `.hide()`, `.show()`, `.toggle()`, `.fadeTo()` to more complex animations like `.animate()`
*  __ajax__ helper functions loads data from the server without a browser page refresh.  For example, `jQuery.get()`, `jQuery.post()`

####<a id="example">Basic jQuery Example</a>

Sometimes it is easier to see code than to explain it.  Here we have a div that has an effect of sliding down slowly.  No one would ever use this, but the idea is that effects are easy to implement.

_index.html_

    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html>
        <head>
            <script src="https://ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/jquery/1.11.1/jquery.min.js"></script>
            <script type="text/javascript" src="script.js"></script>
            <title></title>        
        </head>
        <body>
            <div></div>
        </body>
    </html>

_script.js_

    $(document).ready(function(){
        $(#div).slideDown('slow')
    });

##<a id="jsobjects">JavaScript Objects</a>

####<a id="jsstructure">JavaScript Structure</a>

For some quick background, JavaScript is filled with objects; a browser window, a document, variables, etc.  Objects have _properties_ that describe the object.  Objects can perform actions called _methods_ (can tell by the `()`, e.g. `bark()`).

Example of real world objects

|Object   |Parts   |Actions   |
|---------|--------|----------|
|dog      |tails   |wag       |
|dog      |head    |bark      |
|car      |horn    |honk      |

JavaScript objects

|Object   |Property|Method    |
|---------|--------|----------|
|document |title   |          |
|document |url     |          |
|document |        |write()   |
|window   |innerHeight|       |
|window   |        |alert()   |
|str name |length  |          |
|str name |        |split()   |


####<a id="jqstructure">jQuery Structure</a>

The basic pattern to jQuery is selecting an object with `$` and using a jquery method (e.g. `mouseenter()`), then applying another jquery method/action (e.g. `fadeTo()`) to that object.

    // On mouseover, fade to 25% opacity fast
    $(document).ready(function() {
        $('div').mouseenter(function() {  // select item with jquery function
            $('div').fadeTo('fast', .25);  // apply an action
        });
    });

####<a id="documentready">Document Ready</a>

An example of the javascript and jquery structure is loading a document. The idea is that a page can't be loaded until the document is 'ready'.  jQuery detects this state; here we pass an anonymous function (although you can pass in named functions too) to run as soon as the document is ready.

    // Passing in an anonymous function
    $(document).ready(function() {
        console.log("ready!");
    });
    
    // Passing in a named function
    function myReadyFn(jQuery) {
        console.log("ready!");
    }
    $(document).ready(myReadyFn)

If we break up the pieces, we can see what is going on behind the scenes in jQuery:

*  `$(document)` is a jQuery object.  The `$()` is a function that turns the `document` into a jQuery object.
*  `.ready()` is a type of function; it runs the code inside the parenthesis
*  `function() {}` is the action that is run (or myReadyFn for the named function example)

##<a id="jqevents">jQuery Events</a>

####<a id="mouseenter">mouseenter()</a>

This produces a change when your mouse enters a HTML element.  

    // On mouseover, fade to 25% opacity fast
    $(document).ready(function() {
        $('div').mouseenter(function() {
            $('div').fadeTo('fast', .25);
        });
    });

####<a id="mouseleave">mouseleave()</a>

This produces a change when your mouse exits a HTML element.

    // On mouseleave
    $(document).ready(function() {
        $('div').mouseenter(function() {
            $('div').fadeTo('fast', 1);
        });
        $('div').mouseleave(function() {
            $('div').fadeTo('fast', 0.5);
        });
    });

####<a id="morejqevents">More jQuery events</a>

There is a huge list of jQuery events which can be found [here](https://api.jquery.com/category/events/).

*  .click()
*  .dbclick()
*  .hide()
*  .fadeOut()
*  .fadeIn()
*  .hover()
*  .keypress()
*  .toggle()
*  .slideToggle()

####<a id="chainevents">Chain events</a>

You can chain jQuery events like this example, where we click on id='pull-me' and it toggles id='panel'.

    $(document).ready(function(){
        $('.pull-me').click(function() {
            $('.panel').slideToggle('slow');
        });
    });

##<a id="jqselectors">jQuery selectors</a>

jQuery selectors can help select specific items, whether they are HTML elements, CSS ids, or CSS classes.

    $('button')  // select by HTML element
    $('#header')  // select by CSS id="header"
    $('.removeme')  // select by CSS class="removeme"

For example, say we wanted to remove the fourth list item (identified by the CSS id="removeme").

index.html

    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html>
        <head>
            <title>Simplify, Simplify</title>
            <script type='text/javascript' src='script.js'></script>
        </head>
        <body>
            <div> Remember!
                <ul>
                    <li>
                        <ol>
                            <li>Start with the function keyword</li>
                            <li>Inputs go between ()</li>
                            <li>Actions go between {}</li>
                            <li id="removeme">jQuery is for chumps!</li>
                        </ol>
                    </li>
                    <li>Inputs are separated by commas.</li>
                    <li>Inputs can include other functions!</li>
                </ul>
            </div>   
        </body>
    </html>

script.js

    $(document).ready(function() {
        $target = $('#removeme');
        $target.fadeOut('fast');
    });

####<a id="compoundselectors">Compound selectors</a>

We can apply effects to multiple selectors through a __compound selector__

    $('p, li').fadeTo('slow, 0);')

####<a id="thisselector">This selector</a>

If you want to select only a particular item, use __this__.  For example, only this div fades out instead of all divs.

    $(document).ready(function() {
        $('div').click(function() {
            $(this).fadeOut('slow');
        });
    });

##<a id="jqvariables">jQuery variables</a>

    var fav_number = 7;
    var first_name = "Will";
    var p = $('p')

####<a id="diffpp">Difference $p vs $('p')</a>

`$p` is just a variable name.  `$('p')` is a funtion that creates a jQuery object.

##<a id="modifyhtmlelements">jQuery modifying HTML elements</a>

With jQuery, we can not only modify existing HTML elements, we can also modify the actual structure of our websites in response to user actions.  

####<a id="createhtmlelements">Create HTML elements</a>

Here is a quick example of adding a h1 tag.

    // Set $h1 variable to a text
    $h1 = $("<h1>Hello</h1>")

####<a id="addhtmlelements">append(), prepend(), appendTo(), prependTo()</a>

You can add HTML elements using append(), prepend(), appendTo(), and prependTo().  The functions with 'To' are basically the same, just a reversed order of what you specify.

    #(".info").append("<p>Stuff!</p>");  // Add p to elements with class .info
    #("<p>Stuff!</p>").appendTo(".info");  // Same, just specified differently

####<a id="positionhtmlelements">before(), after()</a>

You can specify where in the DOM to position an element with before() and after().  This lets us move elements around.

Basic example of after

    $('target').after('<tag>To add</tag>');  // Basic format
    $('#one').after('<p>Stuff!</p>');  // Example

Move elements around with after

    var $paragraph = $("p");  // point to existing element
    $("div").after($paragraph);  // move a div after paragraph
    
    // Above code is the same as:
    $("div").after($("p"));  // select existing element with $("p"), put div after

####<a id="removehtmlelements">empty(), remove()</a>

We also have the ability to remove HTML elements from our document.  `empty()` deletes the contents of an element along with all its descendants.  `remove()` deletes not only the contents of an element and the element itself.

    $("p").remove();

##<a id="modifycsselements">jQuery modifying CSS elements</a>

####<a id="addremovecssclasses">addClass(), removeClass(), toggleClass()</a>

You can add, remove, and toggle CSS classes with jQuery.  Note that you are not selecting anything, just modifying your element to add a class so we do not need a # or . in front of the class.

    $('selector').addClass('className');  // Basic Format
    $('selector').removeClass('className');  // Basic Format
    
    $(document).ready(function(){
        $('#text').click(function(){
            $('#text').toggleClass('highlighted');  
        });
    });

####<a id="modifyheightwidth">height(), width()</a>

You can resize elements with `height()` and `width()`.

    $("div").height("100px");
    $("div").width("100px");

####<a id="modifycss">css()</a>

You can modify specific css using a general purpose `.css()`, which takes in two inputs: a CSS element to alter and a value to set it to.

    $("div").css("background-color", "#008800");


##<a id="modifycontent">Modify Content</a>

You can also modify the contents of HTML elements using `html()` and `val()`.

####<a id="modifyhtml">html()</a>

`html()` is used to set the content of the first element match it finds.  

    $("selector").html("contents");  // Example
    $("div").html("I love jQuery!");  // Sets the contents of the first element match

####<a id="modifyval">val()</a>

`val()` is used to get the value of form elements.

    $("input:checkbox:checked").val();  // Get first checked checkbox
    
    var input = $('input[name=checkListItem]').val();  // get the value from an input

####<a id="modifyon">on()</a>

`on()` is an event handler that takes as inputs an event, its selector, and an action.  This allows you to dynamically update the content of your HTML page.

    $(document).on('event', 'selector', function() {
        //Do something!
    });
    
    $(document).on('click', '.item', function() {
        this.remove();
    })

##<a id="jqeffects">jQuery effects</a>

You can create animated effects with jQuery, some are simple like `hide()` and some are a bit more complex like `animate()`

####<a id="hide">hide()</a>

    $(document).ready(function() {
        $('div').hide();
    });

####<a id="focus">focus()</a>

You can use focus on html elements that take input (like a textarea or input).

    $(document).ready(function() {
        $('#target').focus(function() {
            alert("Target is in focus!")
        });
    };)

####<a id="animate">animate()</a>

    $('div').animate({top:'+=10px'}, 500);  // move a div 10 pixels down in 500ms

##<a id="jqui">jQuery UI</a>

For more advanced effects, look up jQuery UI.  These have:

*  __interactions__ like draggable, droppable, resizable, selectable, sortable objects
*  __widgets__ like progressbar, tabs, datepicker, slider
*  __effects__ like more advanced animations and classes
    