---
layout: post
title: Bash Scripting 
---

## {{ page.title }}


- - - -

#Summary

These are notes for shell scripting, specifically for Bash, (aka the Bourne-Again shell, a replacement for the Bourne shell). At its heart, a bash script is just a list of system commands stored in a file (usually with the convention of ending in `.sh`, but doesn't have to since Linux is an extensionless system)

* [Shells and Profiles](#shellsprofiles)
    - [Shells (Interactive / Non-Interactive)](#shells)
    - [Profiles](#profiles)
* [Symbols](#symbols)
    - [! the sha-bang / hashbang](#shabang)
    - [prompt](#prompt)
    - [Comments](#comments)
    - [Variables](#variables)
* [How bash fits in](#bashfit)
* [Structure of a bash command](#structurebashcommand)
    - [How to read a bash synopsis](#readingsynopsis)
    - [Simple Commands](#simplecommands)
    - [Pipelines](#pipelines)
    - [Lists](#lists)
    - [Compound Commands](#compoundcommands)
    - [Coprocesses](#coprocesses)
    - [Functions](#functions)
* [Process Management with ; and &](#processmanagement)
    - [; for batch mode](#batchmode)
    - [& for concurrent mode](#concurrentmode)
* [Control Flow](#controlflow)
    - [if statement](#if)
    - [case statement](#case)
    - [select statement](#select)

- - - -

##<a id="intro">Intro to Bash</a>

Bash code, like any program, is executed by the Linux kernel (if it is marked as executable through `chmod +x`). We can save it to a file or run in a termainl.

    chmod + x hello.sh  # mark hello.sh as an executable program
    ./hello.sh  # tell bash to start the hello.sh program

##<a id="shellsprofiles">Shells and Profiles</a>

Shells and Profiles go hand in hand. The idea is that when our shell starts up (and depending on how it starts up), it looks at our profiles for different settings.

###<a id="shells">Shells</a>

First off, there's a lot of different shells. By default, most systems use the Bash shell. There's others like `csh`, `zsh`, `sh`, each with slightly different syntax. For these notes, I'm only talking about bash.
Now you also have a lot of different profiles; you have your `.bash_profile`, your `.profile`, your `etc/bash.bashrc`. What is going on?!

####Shell Mode (Interactive)

When you open up your terminal, you can run bash commands one at a time; this is the shell's **interactive mode**

1. When you start bash as an **interactive login shell**, bash reads and executes from `/etc/profile` (if it exists, which it does on a Mac).
2. Often this startup script calls other files, like `/etc/bash.bashrc`, `~/.bash_profile`, `~/.bash_login` and `~/.profile`. It uses the first one that exists and is readable.
3. When a bash login shell exits, it reads `~/.bash_logout` (if it exists).

####Shell Mode (Non-Interactive)

When you run a script, its just running a bunch of bash commands one after another; this is the shell's **non-interactive mode**. By default, these bash scripts end in `.sh` (e.g. myscript.sh), but don't have to because Linux is an **extensionless** system.

###<a id="profiles">Profiles</a>

So what's the difference between say `.bash_profile` and `.profile`? Bash profile is specific to bash while profile is used for more generic shells (e.g. not dependent on the bash shell)
Remember how I said depending how your shell starts up? Besides the interactive login shell, you can also start as a non-login interactive shell; this then reads `.bashrc` and does NOT read `.bash_profile`
I use bash so it doesn't matter if I put customizations in `.bash_profile` or `.bashrc`, but you should be aware of this if you do use other shells.

##<a id="symbols">Symbols</a>

Here's a few good to know symbols:

###<a id="shabang">! the sha-bang</a>

You need to include the `!` (sha-bang) in order to invoke the script. This is also called **hash bang**.

* `#!/bin/bash` goes at the beginning of the file and tells your system that this file is a set of commands to be fed to the command interpreter indicated (which is bash)
* Here we have `#!`, a *magic number*, a special marker that designates a file type (an executable shell script)
* We then have a file path, the `/bin/bash` that points to the shell location (note: /bin is where Linux keeps a lot of other ready to run programs like `echo`, `kill`)

###<a id="prompt">prompt `>`</a>

When bash doesn't have enough information to know what to do when a command succeeds or not, it will prompt with `>`.

###<a id="comments">Comments</a>

`#` to start a line off with comments or you can put after code
You cannot put code after a comment

###<a id="variables">Variables</a>

You can assign values to variables.

* Variables have no data types
* No `$` is used when doing assignment, e.g. `STR="Hello world!"`
*  `$` is used when referencing a variable, e.g. `echo $STR`
* `local` to create a local variable (e.g. in a function) like `local STR="HELLO"`
* Remember that Linux has some reserved ENVIRONMENT Variables, like BASH_VERSION, so you can `echo "$BASH_VERSION"`

##<a id="bashfit">Basics of how Bash fits in</a>

So how does this all work? It goes from:

* keyboard/mouse/display
* GUI (Graphical User Interface)
* terminal (note: bash is not what's making text appear on your screen, this is terminal's job of interconnecting programs and making them work together)
* bash

##<a id="structurebashcommand">Structure of a Bash Command</a>

Bash code falls into a few general categories:

* **Simple Commands** are an executable command with an optional set of **arguments**, **environment variables**, and **file descriptor redirections**.
* **Pipelines** are a way of connecting multiple commands together (e.g. link the first process' standard output to the second process' standard input)
* **Lists** are a sequence of commands, with each command separated by a **control operator** (which tells bash how the comand should executed)
* **Compound Commands** are commands with special syntax inside them; they do a lot of different things, but behave as a single command in a command list.
* **Coprocesses** allows you to run a command asynchronously
* **Functions** are commands that you can invoke somewhere else, these are denoted with `()` (always empty)


###<a id="readingsynopsis">How to read a bash synopsis</a>

Just like in `man` pages, you want to know how to read the **SYNOPSIS** (e.g. `man ls`) and see **SYNOPSIS**

* `[ ]` these angular brackets mean an optional field
* `|` the pipe means OR, especially when inside brackets or parenthesis
* Brackets in brackets means the second bracket is dependent on the first bracket

Additional details can be [here](http://www.tfug.org/helpdesk/general/man.html)

###<a id="simplecommands">Simple Commands</a>

The breakdown of a **simple command** is:

    [ var=value ... ] name [ arg ... ] [ redirection ... ]

This means:

* `[ var=value ...]` means that before a command is run, we can assign some environment variables like `name='Will'`
* `[ arg ]` means any command arguments
* `[ redirection ]` means changing what the file descriptor points to (e.g. one process' standard out might point to another process' standard in)

Note that running in terminal is not the same as running in a script (e.g. `var=value`)

Sample code to print out a string

    echo "Hello world!"

###<a id="pipelines">Pipelines</a>

The breakdown of a **pipeline** is:

    [ time [-p]] [ ! ] command [ [|]|[|&] command2 ... ]

This means:

* `time` keyword is used to find out how long a command took
* `!` I'm not sure
* command and command2 is any command; note that bash creates a **subshell** for each command
* `|` is the **pipe** symbol, which connects the standard output of the first command to the standard in of the second command
* `|&` is the symbol to say we want the standard output AND standard error of the first command to connect to the standard in of the second command; normally do not want this

Sample code to reverse a line of text:

    echo Hello | rev

###<a id="lists">Lists</a>

A **list** is a sequence of commands. The breakdown of a list is:

    command control-operator [ command2 control-operator ... ]

This means:

* command is any command
* `control-operator` tells bash what to do when executing the command before it (e.g. `;` is to just run the command and wait for it to end) 

An example of a `control-operator` is:

* `||` run the command before it normally would and move to the next command ONLY IF the command before it FAILED. If there is no failure, the second command does not run. This can be used to show error messages.

Sample code:

    $rm hello.txt || echo "Couldn't delete hello.txt." >&2
    rm: hello.txt: No such file or directory
    Couldn't delete hello.txt 

###<a id="compoundcommands">Compound Commands</a>

**Compound commands** are commands with special syntax inside them. They behave as a single big command in a command list (e.g. a block of commands). Inside are a bunch of subcommands. The breakdown is:

    if list [ ;|<newline> ] then list [;|<newline>] fi

So why use a compound command? It affects say the `||` command in determining if an error happened or not.

Sample code:

    # both lines of code do the same operation, first is a compound command in a command list
    if ! rm hello.txt; then echo "Couldn't delete hello.txt." >&2; exit 1; fi
    rm hello.txt || { echo "Couldn't delete hello.txt." >&2; exit 1; }

###<a id="coprocesses">Coprocesses</a>

A **coprocess** allows you to run a command asynchronously (i.e. in the background). The breakdown is:

    coproc [ name ] command [ redirection ... ]

Here we start an asynchronous process named `auth` that calls `tail` on a log file (first line). We then write a message showing the latest authentication attempt/log. The script continues and reads from the coprocess pipe (each time getting next line from `tail`).

Sample code:

    coproc auth { tail -n1 -f /var/log/auth.log; }
    read latestAuth <&"${auth[0]}"
    echo "Latest authentication attempt: $latestAuth"

###<a id="functions">Functions</a>

A **function** is a temporary new command that you can later invoke. The breakdown is:

    name () compound-command [ redirection ]

We have a function name that is always followed by an empty set of parenthesis `()`. Then add in a compound-command that gets executed when the function is called.

Sample code:

    exists() { [[ -x ${type -P "$1" 2>/dev/null) ]]; }
    exists gpg || echo "Please call GPG." <&2

##<a id="processmanagement">Process Management with `;` and `&`</a>

The bash shell can run commands using two ways, batch (Unix) and concurrent mode, which is basically synchronous and asynchronous

###<a id="batchmode">; as batch mode </a>

You can put more than one command on the same line, just use a `;` (semicolon) to separate commands. `;` runs commands one after another

    echo hello; echo there

###<a id="concurrentmode">& for concurrent mode</a>

You can put more than one command on the same line, just use a `&` to separate commands. `&` runs commands concurrently

    echo hello & echo there

##<a id="controlflow">Control Flow</a>

You can control the flow of bash scripts with `if`, `case`, and `select` statements.

###<a id="if">if statement</a>

You can run specify if statements with the syntax:

    if TEST-COMMANDS; then CONSEQUENT-COMMANDS; fi

####if example

    if [ TEST-COMMANDS -ne 0 ]
      then
        echo "TEST"
    fi

####if example with last command

    if [ $? - eq 0 ] 
      then echo "Last command exited successfully"
    fi

###<a id="case">case statements</a>

`case` is a switch statement

###<a id="select">select statements</a>

`select` creates a prompt (`$PS3`, by default) and allows user to select from a prompt

####select example

    #!/bin/bash
    PS3='Choose your favorite vegetable: '
    select vegetable in "beans" "carrots" "potatoes" "onions" "rutabagas"
    do
      echo
      echo "Your favorite beggie is $vegetable"
      break
    done
    exit

####select in a function example

    #!/bin/bash
    PS3='Choose your favorite vegetable: '
    echo
    choice_of()
    {
    select vegetable
    # [in list] omitted, so 'select' uses arguments passed to the function
    do
      echo
      echo "Your favorite veggie is $vegetable."
      break
    done
    }

    choice_of beans rice carrots radishes rutabaga spinach
    exit 0

### Useful Example Commands

Empty a file with: `cat /dev/null myfile.log`
`date` to get the date (e.g. `Thu Aug 23 15:51:48 MDT 2018`)
date -d "last month" '+%Y-%m' # (e.g. `2018-07`)


