---
layout: post
title: HTML, CSS
---

## {{ page.title }}


- - - -

##<a id="summary">Summary</a>

##<a id="css">CSS</a>

A good tool to learn CSS is Flexbox Froggy.  You use `display: flex;` to align items horizontally using `justify-content: x` and align items vertically using `align-items: y`.

    #pond {
      display: flex;
      justify-content: flex-start;
      align-items: center;
    }

##<a id="css-selection">CSS Selection</a>

Check out http://flukeout.github.io/

###<a id="display-flex-with-justify-content">Justify Content</a>

`justify-content` aligns items __horizontally__.  This property can have these values:

*  `flex-start` is the default, items start at the beginning of the container
*  `flex-end` puts items at the end of the container
*  `center` puts items at the center of the container
*  `space-between` puts items with space between the lines.  This looks like: SASBSCS
*  `space-around` puts items with space before, between, and after the lines.  Space around kinda looks like: ASSBSSC  
*  `initial` sets the property to the default value.
*  `inherit` gets the property of its parent element


###<a id="display-flex-with-align-items">Align Items</a>

`align-items` aligns items __vertically__.  This property can have these values:

*  `stretch` is the default, items are stretched to fit the container
*  `center` puts items at the center of the container
*  `flex-start` puts items at the beginning of the container
*  `flex-end` puts items at the end of the container
*  `baseline` puts items at the baseline of the container
*  `initial` sets the property to the default value
*  `inherit` gets the property of its parent element

####<a id="display-flex-with-align-content">Align Content</a>

`align-content` sets how multiple lines are spaced apart from each other.  This property can have these values:

*  `flex-start` has the lines packed at the top of the container
*  `flex-end` has the lines packed at the bottom of the container
*  `center` has the lines centered in the container
*  `space-between` has the lines with equal spacing between them
*  `space-around` has the lines with equal spacing around them
*  `stretch` has the lines stretched to fit the container
*  `initial` sets the property to the default value
*  `inherit` gets the property of its parent element

####<a id="display-flex-with-align-items">Align Self</a>

`align-self` Gives you control over individual items __vertically__.  Say everything should be on the top, but your yellow item wants to be on the bottom.

    #pond {
      display: flex;
      align-items: flex-start;
    }
    
    .yellow {
      align-self: flex-end;    
    }    

###<a id="display-flex-with-flex-direction">Flex Direction</a>

`flex-direction` changes the direction.  E.g. We have: G Y R, but need R Y G so we use `flex-direction: row-reverse`.  This property can have these values:

*  `row` is the default, items are placed in the same order as the text direction (e.g. G Y R returns G Y R) moving along __horizontally__.
*  `row-reverse` places the items in the opposite direction of the text along __horizontally__.  (e.g. G Y R returns R Y G)
*  `column` is where items are placed top to bottom along __vertically__.  E.g. G Y R would return G Y R vertically
*  `column-reverse` is where items are placed bottom to top along __vertically__.  E.g. G Y R would return R Y G  vertically

####<a id="display-flex-with-order">Order</a>

If you need more than `flex-direction`, you can specify a specific `order`.  By default items have a value of __0__.  We can set items to a positive or negative value (e.g. `order: 1;` would put an item last)

    #pond {
      display: flex;
    }
    
    .shouldbefirst {
      order: 0;
    }
    
    .shouldbelast {
      order: 1;
    }    

###<a id="display-flex-with-flex-wrap">Flex Wrap</a>

`flex-wrap` specifies whether items wrap around the line or not.

*  `nowrap` is the default value, will not wrap
*  `wrap` says that the flexible items will wrap if necessary
*  `wrap-reverse` says that the flexible items will wrap if necessary in reverse order
*  `initial` sets the property to the default value
*  `inherit` gets the property of its parent element

