---
layout: post
title: Golang
---

## {{ page.title }}


- - - -

##<a id="summary">Summary</a>

__Go__ is an open source programming language that focuses on __concurrency__ (i.e.  instead of sequentially/one after another).

###Why Go?

There's __sequential computing__, which runs one command first, then another command as soon as the first is completed.
__Concurrent computing__ is different in that it has many computations executing during overlapping time periods.
__Concurrent computing__ is commonly confused with __Parallel computing__, but it doesn't mean the same thing.

* Parallel computing is like if you have multiple cpu cores, multiple computations occur at the same time.
* Concurrent is like if you have multiple threads and your cpu switches between these threads.

##<a id="install">Install</a>

* Mac: Install Go with homebrew doing: `brew install go`.
* Ubuntu: Install with apt-get doing: `sudo apt-get install golang-go`

##<a id="tools">Go Tools</a>

Go comes with a bunch of tools for managing Go code. You can access by typing in `go`.
Some of these tools can you help `build` (compile code), `install` packages and dependences and run programs.

###<a id="goget">Go Get</a>

You can get source code by using `go get`.  For example, using `go get golang.org/x/tour/gotour`.

###<a id="goinstall">Go Install</a>

You compile and install packages and dependencies using `go install`.

###<a id="workspace">Workspace Directory Tree</a>

So now you have some code, it should look something like this format:

    bin/
        hello  # an executable file (e.g. $hello) runs the file
    pkg/
        darwin_amd64/
            github.com/
                williamqliu/
                    go-examples  # a package that we made
                        string
                        string.a  # package object
            golang.org  # a package that we got using go get
                x/
                    net/
                    tools/
                    tour/... # goes down further to more package objects
    src/
        github.com/
            williamqliu/
                go-examples/
                    hello/
                        hello.go  # our source code
                        hello_test.go  # test code (must have _test in name)
        golang.org
            ...

###<a id="packages">Packages</a>

Every Go program is made up of packages.
Packages start running in package `main`.
A sample progam looks like:

    package main

    import(
        "fmt"
        "math/rand"
    )

    func main() {
        fmt.Println("My favorite number is", rand.Intn(10))
    }

You need the package name as `main` and the func as `main`.
You can have additional functions (e.g. say add), but you also have to define `main`.

A name is exported if it begins with a capital letter.
E.g. if you write a function `Pi` in the `math` package, you can access this as `math.Pi`.

###<a id="samplecode">Sample Code</a>

Okay let's see some sample code already.

    package main

    import (
        "fmt"
        "math/rand"
        "time"
    )

    var c, python, java bool  // the 'type' (e.g. bool) goes after the variable name
    var d, e int = 1, 2  // you can initialize variables

    const Pi = 3.14  // you can make a constant with =. constants cannot be used with := syntax

    func add(x, y int) int {  // same as: x int, y int
        return x + y
    }

    func swap(x, y string) (string, string) {
        return y, x
    }

    func split(sum int) (x, y int) {  // pass in a named variable 'sum'
        x = sum * 4 / 9
        y = sum - x
        return  // a 'naked' return (i.e. no arguments) returns the named values
    }

    func main() {
        fmt.Printf("Hello, world\n")  // Default format with Printf
        fmt.Println("My favorite number is", rand.Intn(10))  // Print line

        k := 3  // := is used in place of a 'var' declaration, creates with an implicit type

        for i:=0; i < 10; i++ {
            sum += i
        }
        fmt.Println(sum)

        fmt.Println("These two numbers added together are:", add(42, 13))  // using the 'add' function we made

        a, b := swap("First", "Second")  // using the 'swap' function we made
        fmt.Println(a, b)

        fmt.Println(split(17))  // using the 'split' function we made

        var i int
        fmt.Println(i, c, python, java)  // by default, things are 0 or false (depending on type)

        var c, python, java = true, false, "No!"  // you can initialize variables
        fmt.Println(d, e, c, python, java)

        k := 3  // a short variable declaration means let Go figure out the type
        fmt.Println(k)

        w := 42  // same as: var w int = 42
        x := float64(w)  // doing a type conversion from int to float64, same as: var f float64 = float64(i)
        y := uint(x)  // a uint is a 'byte', same as: var u uint = uint(f)
        z := rune(y)  // a rune is an `int32`, mainly for Unicode code point
        fmt.Println(z)  // If you declare a variable, you have to use it or else it's an error!
        fmt.Println("Pi is", Pi)

        fmt.Println("The time is", time.Now())
    }

You can then run the program with:

* `go build`
* `go run hello.go`

## Control Flow

### For loops

Similar to other for loops with an init, a condition expression (evaluated
before every iteration), and a post statement (evaluated at end of every
iteration). Notice there are no parenthesis surrounding the components of
these for loops. The `init` and `post` statements are optional (this means
that `while` is `for` in Go)

    sum := 0
    for i :=0; i < 10; i++ {
        sum += i
    }
    fmt.Println(sum)

    // no need to setup init and post sections
    sum :=1
    for ; sum < 1000; {
        sum += sum
    }
    fmt.Println(sum)

    // for-loop is the while loop
    sum := 1
    for sum < 1000 {
        sum += sum
    }
    fmt.Println(sum)

    // if you omit everything, an infinite loop is created
    for {
    }

### if statements

Just like for-loops, you do not need parenthesis `()` around an if statement,
but `{}` are required.

    if x < 0 {
        fmt.Println("Hey")
    }

    // You can do a short statement to execute before the condition that is
    // only in scope until the end of the if statement
    func pow(x, n, lim float64) float64 {
        if v := math.Pow(x, n); v < lim {
            return v
        } else {
            fmt.Printf("%g >= %g\n", v, lim)
        }
        return lim
    }
    fmt.Println(pow(3, 2, 10))

### switch statemnets

Switch statements are pretty normal, parsing from top to bottom. If no
condition is given, then same as `switch true`, which helps save long
if-else statements.

    switch os := runtime.GOOS; os {
    case "darwin":
        fmt.Println("OS X")
    case "linux":
        fmt.Println("Linux")
    default:
        fmt.Printf("%s", os)
    }


    // switch without a condition
    t := time.Now()
    switch {
    case t.Hour() < 12:
        fmt.Println("Good morning!")
    case t.Hour() < 17:
        fmt.Println("Good afternoon.")
    default:
        fmt.Println("Good evening.")
    }

### Defer

A defer statement defers the execution of a function until the surrounding
function returns. Deferred call's arguments are evaluated immediately, but
the function call is not executed until the surrounding funtion returns.

    defer fmt.Println("world")
    fmt.Println("hello")

Deferred function calls are pushed onto a stack. When a function returns, its
deferred calls are executed in last-in-first-out order.

    fmt.Println("counting")
    for i := 0; i < 10; i++ {
        defer fmt.Println(i)
    }
    fmt.Println("done")

## Pointers

Go uses **pointers**, which hold the memory address of a value.

* The type `*T` is a pointer to a `T` value. Its zero value is `nil`.
* The `&` operator generates a pointer to its operand.
* The `*` operator denotes the pointer's underlying value.

Some code examples:

    var p *int  // * means the pointer
    i := 42
    p = &i  // p points to i
    fmt.Println(*p)  // read i through the pointer p
    *p = 21  // set i through pointer p, aka 'dereferencing' or 'indirecting'

## Structs

A **struct** is a collection of fields. You can access struct fields using a dot.
Make sure to make variables capitalized so that data is exported outside of the
struct (if lowercase, will not export)


    type Vertex struct {
        X int
        Y int
    }

    type main(){
        v := Vertex{1, 2}
        fmt.Println(v)

        // access struct fields using a dot
        v.X = 4
        fmt.Println(v.X)

        // access struct fields through a pointer
        p := &v
        p.X = 1e9  // can also write as (*p).X, but usually no need for explicit dereference
        fmt.Println(v)

    }

### Struct Literals

A struct literal is a newly allocated struct value by listing the values of its
fields. You can list just a subset of the fields using the `Name:` syntax.
`&` is a special prefix that returns a pointer to the struct value.

    type Vertex struct {
        X, Y int
    }

    var (
        v1 = Vertex{1, 2}  // has type Vertex
        v2 = Vertex{X: 1}  // Y:0 is implicit
        v3 = Vertex{}      // X:0 and Y:0
        p = &Vertex{1, 2}  // has type *Vertex, p is a pointer to a struct allocated on the heap
    )

## Arrays

An array type `[n]T` is an array of `n` values of type `T`.

e.g. `var a [10]int` means a variable `a` as an array of ten integers

An array's length is part of its type, so arrays cannot be resized.

    var a[2]string
    a[0] = "Hello"
    a[1] = "World"
    fmt.Println(a[0], a[1])
    fmt.Println(a)

    // initialize with values
    primes := [6]int{2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13}
    fmt.Println(primes)

### Array Slices

A slice of an array describes the section of an underlying array, it does not
store any data. Any changes to the slices will change the underlying array.

    // slice
    var s[]int = primes[1:4]
    fmt.Println(s)

### Array slice literals

An array slice literal is like an array literal without the length.

    // array literal
    [3]bool{true, true, false}

    // creates same array as above, then builds a slice that references it
    []bool{true, true, false}

When slicing, you can omit the high or low bounds to get the defaults. Default
is zero for the low bound and the length of the slice for the high bound.

    var a [10]int
    a[0:10]
    a[:10]
    a[0:]
    a[:]

### Array slice length and capacity

A slice has both a **length** and a **capacity**.

* The length of a slice is the number of elements it contains.
* The capacity of a slice is the number of elements in the underlying array,
  counting from the first element in the slice.
* The zero value of a slice is `nil`. A nil slice has a length and capacity of
0 and no underlying array.

Use `len(s)` and `cap(s)` to get length and capacity of a slice.

    s :=[]int{2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13}

    // slice the slice to give it zero length
    s = s[:0]

    // extend a slice's length
    s = s[:4]

    // drop its first two values
    s = s[2:]

    var anothers []int
    if anothers == nil{
        fmt.Println("nil")
    }

### Array slices with `make`

You can use the built-in `make` function to create dynamically-sized arrays.
The make function allocates a zeroed array and returns a slice that refers to
that array.

    a := make([]int, 5)  // len(a)=5

    // to specify a capacity, pass a third argument to make
    b := make([]int, 0, 5)  // len(b)=0, cap(b)=5
    b = b[:cap(b)]  // len(b)=5, cap(b)=5
    b = b[1:]  // len(b)=4, cap(b)=4

### Array slice of slices

Slices can contain any type, including other slices.

    // Create a tic-tac-toe board
    board := [][]string{
        []string{"_", "_", "_"},
        []string{"_", "_", "_"},
        []string{"_", "_", "_"},
    }

    // players take turns
    board[0][0] = "X"
    board[2][2] = "O"
    board[1][2] = "X"
    board[1][0] = "O"

### Append to a slice

You can use a built-in `append` to append new elements to a slice.

    func append(s []T, vs ...T) []T

What this means is to append to slice s of type T with T values to append.
In return you get all the elements of the original slice plus the provided
values. If the array s is too small to fit, then a bigger array is allocated.

    var s []int
    s = append(s, 0)  // append works on nil slices
    s = append(s, 1)  // slice grows as needed
    s = append(s, 2, 3, 4)  // can add more than one element at a time

## Range

You can use `range` to iterative over a slice or map.

* For each iteration, you get two values (first the index, second is the value
  - a copy of the element at that index)
* You can skip the index or value by passing in `_`
* If you only want the index, drop the value section

Code example:

    var pow = []int{1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128}
    for i, v := range pow {
        fmt.Printf("2**%d = %d\n", i, v)
    }

    for _, value := range pow {
        fmt.Printf("%d", value)
    }

## Maps

A **map** maps keys to values.
The zero value of a map is `nil`. A nil map has no keys, nor can keys be added.
The `make` function returns a map of the given type, initialized and ready to
use.

    type Vertex struct {
        Lat, Long float64
    }

    var m map[string]Vertex

    func main() {
        m = make(map[string]Vertex)
        m["Bell Labs"] = Vertex{
            40.68, -74.39,
        }
        fmt.Println(m["Bell Labs"])
    }

### Map Literals

Map literals are like struct literals, except the keys are required.

    // Map Literals
    type Vertex struct {
        Lat, Long float64
    }

    var m = map[string]Vertex{
        "Bell Labs": Vertex{
            40.68, -74.39,
        },
        "Google": Vertex{
            37.42, -122.98,
        },
    }

    // If the top-level type is just a type name, you can omit it from the
    // elements of the literal. For example, this is the same as above:
    var m = map[string]Vertex{
        "Bell Labs": {40.68, -74.39},
        "Google": {37.42, -122.08},
    }

### Mutating Maps

You can modify maps with the following actions (assuming a map m):

* Get an element with `elem = m[key]`
* Insert or update an element with `m[key] = elem`
* Delete an elemnt with `delete(m, key)`

You can also check that an element is present with a two-value assignment

    elem, ok = m[key]
    // if 'key' is in 'm', then 'ok' is 'true', else 'ok' is 'false'
    // if 'key' is not in 'm', then 'elem' is the zero value for the maps'
    // element type

    // if 'elem' or 'ok' have not yet been declared, use this short hand:
    elem, ok := m[key]

## Function values

Functions are values too, meaning they can be passed around like other values.

* Function values can be used as function arguments and return values.
* Functions may be **closures**. A closure is a function value that references
  variables outside its body.

## Methods

Go does not have classes. You can define methods on types.

* A **Method** is a function with a special **receiver** argument.
* The receiver appears at its own argument list between the `func` keyword and
  the method name

Code example where the `Abs` method has a receiver `v` of type `Vertex` and
returns a float64.

    type Vertex struct {
        X, Y float64
    }

    func (v Vertex) Abs() float64 {
        return math.Sqrt(v.X*v.X + v.Y*v.Y)
    }

    // can also be written as a regular function with no change in functionality
    func Abs(v Vertex) float64{
        return math.Sqrt(v.X*v.X + v.Y*v.Y)
    }

You can declare a method on non-struct types.
E.g. numeric type `MyFloat` with an `Abs` method.

    type MyFloat float64

    func (f MyFloat) Abs() float64 {
        if f < 0 {
            return float64(-f)
        }
        return float64(f)
    }

    func main() {
        f := MyFloat(-math.Sqrt2)
        fmt.Println(f.Abs())
    }

### Methods with Pointer Receivers

You can declare methods with pointer receivers.
The receiver type has the literal syntax `*T` for some type `T`
Methods with pointer receivers can modify the value to which the receiver
points. Pointer receivers are more common than value receivers.

## Interfaces

An **interface type** is defined as a set of method signatures.
A value of interface type can hold any value that implements those methods.

    type Abser interface {
        Abs() float64
    }

    type MyFloat float64

    type Vertex struct {
        X, Y float64
    }

    func main() {
        var a Abser
        f := MyFloat(-math.Sqrt2)
        v := Vertex{3, 4}

        a = f   // a MyFloat implements Abser
        a = &v  // a *Vertex implements Abser

    }

## Go Tooling

Below are good tools to use:

* `gofmt`
* `errcheck`
* `go build`
    - `GOOS=windows go build` allows cross compilation (e.g. windows creates
      .exe)
* `go list -f '{{ .Name }}: {{ .Doc }}` to list package names and documentation
* `go doc` to get documentation from a package (e.g. `go doc fmt`, `go doc fmt
  Printf`, `godoc -http :6060` to run documentation server)
* `go get github.com/golang/example/hello`

## Go Testing

Make a file with a name ending in `_test` so that the test runner can pick up,
e.g. `main_test.go`

    package main

    import "testing"

    func TestHandler(t *testing.T) {
        t.Errorf("Something went really wrong")
    }

There are also benchmarking options.

### Go Load Testing

Use `go-wrk` to run load testing. Install from:

    go get github.com/adjust/go-wrk

You'll see:

* Requests/sec
* Transfer/sec
* Avg Req Time
* Fastest Request
* Slowest Request
* Number of Errors

You can see what your code is doing by instrumenting your code.

    import (
        "net/http"
        _ "net/http/pprof"
    )

Then visit `localhost:8080/debug/pprof/` and you can list the heap, the
coroutines, number of times garbage collection ran, how long were pauses.

### pprof

Use go's tool pprof to measure the performance of your binary

    E.g. `go tool pprof --seconds=5 localhost:8080/`

### go-torch

Uber's go tool to measure the performance of your binary and creates an easier
to read "Flame Graph".

    go get github.com/uber/go-torch


### Mile High Gophers Meetup

Meetup hosted by bitly

* Go resources: golangweekly.com
* Slack: invite.slack.golangbridge.org, link to invite on meetup comments
* Swag: teespring.com/denvergophers-always
* GoTime Podcast: changelog.com/gotime
* A Tour of Go: tour.golang.org/welcome/1
* Companies hiring: shell apps, bitly, Comcast
* Job links: bit.ly/denvergojobs

## Live Coding Notes

* Go does not know how to parse custom parmaeters in a route (e.g. `:user`)
    * Use gorilla/mux, pressly/chi, or http/router
    * go get -u github.com/pressly/chi
    * will install in `go/src/github.com/...`
    * Init Router: `r := chi.NewRouter()`
    * `r.Get("/users/:user/repos", getUser)`
    * `r.Use(middleware.Logger)`

Package manager is `govendor`, will look at `/vendor/` first.
    * govendor init
    * govendor fetch github.com/pressly/chi@v2.1
    * will appear as `/vendor` in your github (e.g.
      go/src/github.com/williamqliu/go-app/vendor/
    * imports in as `github.com/pressly/chi`

Check for package to handle errors nicer so less repeated code

Reflex is language agnostic, pass in shell and does hot reloading

Middleware:

Useful middleware includes:

* **realip** to figure out users's IP
* **requestid** to get user's request id

Structs

Structs represents cursor

    type GithubRepo struct {
        FullName string `json:"full_name"`
    }

HTTP

Do not use straight `http.Get("someurl")` - default client used to not have
timeout by default? Can check by looking at `http.Client`
Kyle's live coding without seeing his cursor!
Neat, built-in json parsing into standard library

    func getRepos(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
        user := chi.URLParam(r, "user")
        urlStr := fmt.Sprintf("https//api.github.com/users/%s/repos", user)
        resp, err := http.Get(urlStr)
        if err != nil {
            log.Printf("%+v", err)
            http.Error(w, http.StatusText(500), 500)
            return
        }

        var repos []*GithubRepo
        json.NewDecoder(resp.Body).Decode(&repos)
        b, err := json.Marshall(repos)
        if err != nil {
            log.Printf("%+v", err)
            http.Error(w, http.StatusText(500), 500)
            return
        }
        w.Header().set("Content-Type", "application/json")

    }

Another code example

    func (h Handler) Routes() chi.Router {
    }
    ...
    at ar.Mount("/repos", reposHandler.Routes())

Documentation

godoc
Step through: delve

Code organization:

repos with handlers as packages
organize by resource as a package (e.g. models)
organize by service as a package

Additional things to look up:

* Go Receiver
* Go does not have classes
* Can pass in handlers to funcs (e.g. a Client shouldn't have to be initialized
  in every GET request, just pass that in)
    * E.g. in main, create client, a responseHandler
* pressly chi repo has a good examples directory
* Channels - like a queue, two goroutines share the same channel

Package SQL provides what you need, no need to have an ORM
gorm is an ORM
sqlx gives you a little bit of sugar and not a full blown ORM
a library writes to a file, then you write the implementation of the database;
boltdb

## Go Meetup

Jason Keene from Pivotal

A tour of gRPC in Go

What is gRPC?

* gRPC is a point to point RPC for req/resp and streaming
* Has native Go, C and Java implementations, all other languages use C bindings
* Primarily used for internal communications
* Runs over HTTP2

How to use it

* Create a protobuf definition file (struct of how messages are represented)
* Generate the client and server stubs
* Implement the server interface to response to requests
* Register your server interface and start servicing requests

sigint and sigterm to handle interrupt signal

How to protect API from unauthorized access?

* Mutual Auth TLS
* Oauth2
* Custom Auth

How do I roll out new versions of my API?

* Protobuf package names and registration
* A single port can run v1 and v2, use reflection to determine which to use

What happens if things go wrong?

* gRPC reconnects for you (at least for requests/response)
* Each endpoint receives a context that can be used to teardown an entire chain
  of interactions between multiple systems
* When streaming data to clients gRPC will quickly fill a client side buffer
  that allows clients to read at their own rate

How does it compare to others?

* REST/JSON
    Pro: Everywhere
    Con: No streaming - can add on streaming with websockets though
    Con: Text based encoding
    Con: Text based transport (lots of repeated bytes over the wire)

* Websockets
    Pro: Bi-directional streaming
    Pro: Large adoption with proxies and firewalls
    Con: Can not interleave data frames
    Con: Seems to be obsolted by http2

* gRPC
    Pro: All in Golang, goes well with Go ecosystem

### Additional Notes from Meetup

* go-kit is a programming tookit for microservices
* 'testify' to create asserts (syntatic sugar)
* 'pkgerrors' adds stack trace to errors instead of just string of error
* 'alteryx' is go and elixir for data processing
* 'internal' is a special directory in go, cannot be imported by anything else
  (put in here until you want to make dir public)
* 'reflex' package does run-time reflection, so a program can manipulate
  objects with arbitrary types (e.g. make a value with static type interface{}
  and extract its dynamic type info using `TypeOf`)
* Use httpie (`http`) for easier alternative to `curl`. `==` is query param,
  `=` is json body
* json marshaller is by default built-into go so easy to test, especially mocks

## Denver Go Meetup Notes 8-24-2017

Resources

* DTC Go Meetup on 2nd Wednesday
* bit.ly/golangslack
* bit.ly/gotimefm
* bit.ly/golangweekly
* milehighmeetups.com
* gobuildit.github.io

Concourse Talk

* CI that scales with your project (implemented in Go)
* Concourse is a thing that does things... (continuous thing doer)
* If you have things to do in a consistent, reproducable, automated way, then
  Concourse does it.
* Builds out pipelines
* E.g. Job to run tests on different environments, broader acceptance tests,
  then promotes branch to release
* Deploy two versions, run battery of tests to see if any performance
  regressions
* Idempotent, Reproducible, Versioned Resources
* Chaos monkey
* Good use case is if you have Docker files, build image, push to Docker Hub
* Fan out of building binaries in parallel, then joining (fan in)
* Pipeline driven so results can flow from one job to another
* Can be good alternative to something like Jenkins, Travis CI
* Resources are versionable (can get, change, put, check on update)
* Jobs can be Pass/Fail/Pending (not enough workers put on job)
* Trigger a build (yellow pulse means currently on it)
* Dotted line vs Curved Line vs Straight Line represents different things
* Only way to extend Concourse is through Resources (third party resources)
* Lots of built-in Resources (e.g. s3, github-release, docker-image, archive,
  slack)
* To debug, you can virtually ssh into the system (aka hijack the system)
* Drone is a similar (simplified version)

### Demo with Concourse

https://github.com/jasonkeene/concourse-demo

Summary:

* Spin up concourse with docker-compose
* Write a quick pipeline and demo it
* Example run command: `fly -t local-demo set-pipeline -c pipeline/example.yml -p
  example`
* Example run (failure) and hijack: `fly -t local-demo hijack -j
  example/run-tests`

#### Demo Steps

* Get IP Address of Docker Compose

    export CONCOURSE_EXTERNAL_URL="http://$(ifconfig en0 inet | grep inet | awk '{print $2}'):8080"

#####Sample Job - pipeline/main.yml

Code

    jobs:
    - name: hello
      plan:
      - task: hello
        config:
          platform: linux
          image_resource:  # defines docker image
            type: docker-image
            source:
              repository: golang
        run:
          path: /bin/bash
          args:
          - -c
          - echo 'hello gophers'

#### Insides of Concourse

* Containers -- garden-runc
* Scheduling
* Volume Management -- baggageclaim
* Caching

#### Lifecycle

task.yml file

* `platform: linux` finds a linux worker
* `image_resource:  type: docker-image...` create a resource
* `inputs:  - name: my-app` mounts

#### Scheduling

Scheduling is hard

* Kubernetes
* Mesos
* Docker Swarm
* Diego (Cloud Foundry)

#### Volume Types

Mounting volume types to a container is a pain. Its a reference to the volume.

* Btrfs -- block based
  - pro: writes are cheap
  - con: high memory usage
* OverlayFS -- file based
  - pro: low memory
  - con: writes cost $$$
* Naive
  - pro: consistent
  - con: copies all the things (not just the delta)

