---
layout: post
title: RabbitMQ 
---


# {{ page.title }}

# Summary

__RabbitMQ__ is an open source message broker that implements a variety of message
protocols. RabbitMQ was originally developed to implement **AMQP** (Advanced
Message Queuing Protocol), a standard and cross-langauge protocol for messaging
middleware.

## Better Summary

RabbitMQ is a message broker. RabbitMQ receives and sends messages. Think of it like
putting mail into a postbox and knowing that mail will get delivered. Instead of mail,
RabbitMQ stores and sends __messages__.

Usually the producer, consumer, and broker are not on the same host.

The core idea in the messaging model in RabbitMQ is that a producer never sends any messages directly to a queue.
Usually, the producer doesn't even know if a message will be delivered to any queue at all. Instead, the producer
sends messages to an __exchange__. When that exchange receives these messages, the exchange decides what to do with
the message; should it be appended to a particular queue? should it be appended to multiple queues? should it get discarded?
The rules for an exchange are defined by the __exchange type__.

## Terms

__producer__ is a program that sends messages.
__exchange__ is the place that a producer sends messages to.
__consumer__ is a program that waits and receives messages.
__queue__ is the name of the post box, basically a place to store your messages. Its a large
message buffer that is limited to your machine's memory and disk limits.
__work queue__ (aka __task queue__) is to avoid doing a resource-intensive task immediately (and do it later)
__ack(nowledgement__ an ack is a message sent back by the consumer to tell RabbitMQ that message has been received, processed and RabbitMQ is free to delete it. If no ack is received, that message will be re-queued.
__virtual host__ (aka __vhost__) is a namespace for objects like exchanges, queues, and bindings

## Exchange Types

The rules for how we send messages to consumers are determined by the __exchange type__. A few of the different
exchanges include: `direct`, `topic`, `headers`, and `fanout`.

* __default exchange__ - the default exchange, each queue is automatically bound to a default exchange using a routing key
  equal to the queue name
* __direct exchange__ - routes messages with a routing key equal to the routing key declared by the binding queue
  e.g. routingkey 'green' goes to queue 'green', that is then consumed
* __fanout exchange__ - broadcasts all the messages it receives to all the queues it knows (good for loggers)
* __topic exchange__ - routes messages to queues whose routing key matches all or a portion of a routing key.
  Messages are published with routing keys containing a series of words separated by a dot e.g. `word1.word2.word3`.
  Queues binding to a topic exchange supply a matching pattern for the server to use when routing the message (e.g. `*`
  to match a word in a specific position of the routing key or `#` to match zero or more words)
* __headers exchange__ - routes messages based on a matching of messages headers to the expected headers specified by
  the binding queue. It's basically a little more detailed than the topic exchange in that you can have more than one
  criteria specified as a filter.

The connection between an exchange and a queue is called the __binding__.
The __routing key__ is a message attribute. The exchange might look at this key when deciding how to route the messages to queues.

# Life of a Message

* The producer publishes a message to the exchange.
* The exchange receives the message and is now responsible for the routing of the message.
* A binding has to be set up between the queue and the exchange. In this example, say we have bindings to two different queues from the exchange. The exchange routes the message in to the queues.
* The messages stay in the queue until they are handled by a consumer
* The consumer handles the message.

# Types of Protocols

RabbitMQ is a general purpose message broker. So what kind of protocols are there?
Some of these include:

* Point to Point
* Request/Reply
* Pub-Sub

# Examples

## Simplest Producer and Consumer

Here we have the simplest program that can send and receives messages from a named queue.

	import pika
	
	
	credentials = pika.PlainCredentials('guest', 'guest')
	parameters = pika.ConnectionParameters(host="localhost",
	                                       credentials=credentials,
	                                       heartbeat_interval=600)
	
	
	def test_simple_producer_consumer():
	    print("Creating Connection, testing simple producer and consumer")
	
	    # Create Connection
	    connection = pika.BlockingConnection(parameters)
	    channel = connection.channel()
	    channel.queue_declare(queue='hello-queue')
	
	    # Publish to Queue
	    print("About to publish to queue")
	    channel.basic_publish(exchange='', routing_key='hello-queue', body='test')  # publish to default exchange
	    print "After Channel Publish"
	
	    # Consume from Queue and run callback
	    channel.basic_consume(callback, queue='hello-queue', no_ack=True)  # acknowledge
	    print(' [*] Waiting for messages. To exit press CTRL+C')
	    channel.start_consuming()
	    connection.close()
	
	
	def callback(ch, method, properties, body):
	    """ Callback from Consumer """
	    print(" [x] Received %r" % body)
	
	
	if __name__ == '__main__':
	    test_simple_producer_consumer()

## Work Queues

Here we have a __work queue__ that is used to distribute time-consuming tasks among multiple workers

# RabbitMQ Architecture

RabbitMQ can be used either synchronous or asynchronous.

## Tools

### rabbitmqctl

__rabbitmqctl__ is a command line tool for managing a RabbitMQ broker. It performs
all actions by connecting to one of the broker's nodes.

Commands include:

* `rabbitmqctl -l` to list commands
* `rabbitmqctl status` to show memory
* `rabbitmqctl stop_app` and `rabbitmqctl start_app`
* `rabbitmqctl reset` and `rabbitmqctl force_reset`
* `rabbitmqctl rotate_logs`
* `rabbitmqctl join_cluster` join a cluster as either a __disc__ (default) or __ram__ only
* `rabbitmqctl purge_queue <queue>` to remove all messages in it
* `rabbitmqctl list_queues` and `rabbitmqctl list_exchanges`

### rabbitmqadmin

__rabbitmqadmin__ is a command line tool that ships with the the management plugin,
allowing you to do some of the same actions as the web-based UI, making things a bit
more helpful for automation tasks. If you want to invoke rabbitmqadmin from your own
program, then consider using an HTTP API client library instead.

### rabbitmq-plugins

__rabbitmq-plugins__ is how you can enable plugins in RabbitMQ.

    rabbitmq-plugins list  # see what plugins are enabled
    rabbitmq-plugins enable <plugin-name>  # enable a plugin
    rabbitmq-plugins disable <plugin-name>  # disable a plugin

Plugins include:

* rabbitmq_auth_backend_http - authentication / authorisation plguin that uses an external HTTP API
* rabbitmq_management - a managemnet / monitoring API over HTTP, along with a browser-based UI (I use this all the time)
* rabbitmq_shovel - a plugin that shovels messages from a queue on one broker to an exchange on another broker
* rabbitmq_tracing - provides a GUI to capture traced messages and log them in text or JSON format
* rabbitmq-top is used to analyze node memory use
* rabbitmq-mqtt - lightweight messaging protcol for small sensors and mobile devices; good for high-latency or unreliable networks

### rabbitmq 'firehose'

RabbitMQ has a __firehose__ feature that the administrator can enable on a per-node, per-vhost basis,
basically making it so that an exchange's publish and delivery-notifications can be CC'd.

#### Enable firehose

1.) Decide which node (default is 'rabbit@(hostname)' and vhost (default is "/") you want to enable firehose for.
2.) In your vhost, when creating your queues, bind them to the topic exchange `amq.rabbitmq.trace` and start consuming
3.) Run `rabbitmqctl trace_on`

#### Disable firehose

1.) Run `rabbitmqctl trace_off`
2.) Clean up the queues used by the firehose

#### firehose Notification Format

Firehose publishes messages to the topic exchange `amq.rabbitmq.trace` with the
routing key `publish.exchangename` for messages entering the broker or to
the routing key `deliver.queuename` for messages leaving the broker.

## Celery

So with a task queue, we can distribute work across threads or machines.
You input a __task__ (a unit of work) and then add it to the task queue.
There's worker processes that come check if new work to perform.

Celery communicates via messages. We add a message to the queue, then the broker
delivers that message to a worker. Celery uses a message transport (e.g. RabbitMQ
or Redis) to send and receive messages.
