---
layout: post
title: Solr
---


# {{ page.title }}

## Summary

Apache __Solr__ is an open source search platform built on Apache __Lucene__.
Other platforms built off of Lucene include __Elasticsearch__.

http://lucene.apache.org/solr/guide/7_4/solr-tutorial.html

## Tutorial

To get familiar with Solr, we'll:

* Start Solr, create a collection, index some basic documents
* Perform searches and request facets with datasets

## Start Solr in SolrCloud Mode

Start Solr as a two-node cluster (both nodes on the same machine) and creat a collection
during startup.

    ./bin/solr start -e cloud

### Setup configs

#### Zookeeper

Note that since we didn't specify a Zookeeper cluster, Solr then launches its own
Zookeeper and connects both nodes to it.

#### Ports

You'll get a prompt for setting up your cluster. By default, we'll have:

* Port `8983` for the first node
* Port `7574` for the second node

#### Collection

We'll name the collection, default `gettingstarted`, tutorial says `techproducts`
so we'll use that. Normally you can see collections under the web GUI like:

    http://localhost:8983/solr/#/~collections/techproducts

#### Shards

We'll specify the number of __shards__ (how you want to split your index).
Two means we'll split relatively evenly across the two nodes we specified above.

#### Replicas

A __replica__ is the copy of the index that's used for failover.

#### configSet

Solr has two main configuration files:

* the schema file (called `managed-schema` or `schema.xml`)
* `solrconfig.xml`

During initial setup, you'll be asked whether you want `default` (bare bones)
or `sample_techproducts_configs` (we'll want the latter)

You'll see your configs over at:

http://localhost:8983/solr/techproducts/config

A SolrCloud example will be running at:

http://localhost:8983/solr

http://localhost:8983/solr/#/

In the 'Cloud Tab' under 'Cloud' > 'Graph', you can see `techproducts` appear in
two shards, with each shard having a replica on each server and port.

## Posting Data

To insert data, you'll need the `bin/post` tool to help index various types of documents.
In the tutorial, you'll see files in the `example/exampledocs` dir.


    /usr/local/solr-7.4.0/example/exampledocs
    $ ls
    books.csv            hd.xml          manufacturers.xml  monitor2.xml      mp500.xml    sd500.xml      test_utf8.sh
    books.json           ipod_other.xml  mem.xml            monitor.xml       post.jar     solr-word.pdf  utf8-example.xml
    gb18030-example.xml  ipod_video.xml  money.xml          more_books.jsonl  sample.html  solr.xml       vidcard.xml


