---
layout: post
title: GitLab
---


# {{ page.title }}


## Syncing GitHub and GitLab

If you're switching over from GitHub to GitLab or vice versa, you might want to sync up your repositories so that
if there's an update to one, it'll be reflected in the other.

### GitLab

GitLab has some cool features to import a repository from GitHub pretty easily as a project. Once you import a project
over, you'll want to make sure the repos get synced. Click on 'Settings' > 'Repository'.

#### Pull from a remote repository

I clicked 'Mirror repository' and under my Git repository URL, I have 
`https://git@github.com/WilliamQLiu/my_repo_name.git`. For Authentication Method, I'm using a 'Password', which
is a Token that I generated on GitHub (I'm using Token since I have 2FA).

#### Tokens

You can generate a token under 'Settings' > 'Repository' and add a 'Deploy Token'. That way you can run say
git clone using that token.

E.g. git clone https://my-token-username:my-token-password@gitlab.com/mycompany/mydept/myproject.git

#### Push to a remote repository

I setup a remote repository that I want to update anytime my GitLab repo changes.
I clicked 'Settings' > 'Repository' > 'Mirroring repositories' > 'Mirror a repository' and for the URL I have:
`https://<enter_my_token>@github.com/WilliamQLiu/my_repo_name.git`.

Don't worry, the Token is hidden. Since I'm using a token, I'm going to use a 'https' url instead of ssh url.
For 'Authentication Method', you can leave that as 'None' since we have our token in the url.

That's it, you should be synced!

### GitLab CI/CD

Depending on the files you have in your repo, GitLab will run different configurations and commands:

* Dockerfile - if you have a dockerfile, it'll build it
* `.gitlab-ci.yml` - what scripts and environments to run
* `Pipfile` or `runtime.txt` - specify the version of Python

### GitLab AutoDevops

If you don't have any of the above, you can enable 'AutoDevops' where GitLab will try to guess what you're building
using a Heroku buildpack. To enable, click on 'Settings > CI/CD > Auto Devops > Enable Auto DevOps'

## GitLab Runner

So if you want to test the CI system without having to keep making updates thinking you fixed an issue (only to have 
one or two tests fail), you can use __gitlab runner__.

### Install GitLab Runner

https://docs.gitlab.com/runner/install/linux-manually.html

Give permissions for the file to execute:

    sudo chmod +x /usr/bin/gitlab-runner

Create a GitLab CI user:

    sudo useradd --comment 'GitLab Runner' --create-home gitlab-runner --shell /bin/bash

Install and run as a service

    sudo gitlab-runner install --user=gitlab-runner --working-directory=/home/gitlab-runner

Start and Stop the Service

    sudo gitlab-runner start
    sudo gitlab-runner stop

### Running Gitlab CI Multi Runner

Install gitlab-ci-multi-runner, which is the exact same application that runs the tests on the GitLab CI instance:

    gitlab-ci-multi-runner exec docker <test_name_command>

    e.g. gitlab-ci-multi-runner exec docker test

A test command could be like pytest

It'll check for a .gitlab-ci.yml file in your repo and run that.

### .gitlab-ci.yml

A `.gitlab-ci.yml` file will define a set of jobs. Certain keywords like `before_script` will be executed before
each job.

See documentation here: https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/yaml/README.html

The default gitlab ci file is here:

https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab-ci-yml/blob/master/Auto-DevOps.gitlab-ci.yml

### CI-Lint

There's a built-in linter under your project (as `/ci/lint`)

    https://gitlab.com/MyTeam/my_repo/-/ci/lint

Insert your .gitlab-ci.yml file there and Validate it.
