---
layout: post
title: Jenkins
---


# {{ page.title }}

__Jenkins__ is an open source automation server.

## What is Jenkins?

Jenkins is an open source automation server

* Automation server runs jobs automatically
* Open source - no lock in
* Java - can install on Windows, Mac, Linux
* Popular (Industry standard, lots of Plugins for different use cases)
* Scalable (able to add Executor/slave servers)

## Example Jobs

What are some example jobs that the Jenkins server can automate?

* Terminal Commands
* Shell Scripts
* Python
* Database Queries

Commands can be created through the GUI or through an API (e.g. Python)

* On Jenkins Dockerfile, saved as xml configs under `/var/jenkins_home/jobs/<job_name/config.xml`

## How does it help my team?

Imagine we’re in an assembly line

* Need to define what gets handed off from one person to another (e.g. go-live)
* More difficult than assembly line since we also maintain projects

So how does a tool like Jenkins help?

* Requirements defined in code (as integration tests)
* Continuous testing (less scared of changes)
* Visibility of changes across departments
* More concrete deliverables between departments

## More Detailed Examples

Example integration test across departments

* Data - HTTP request to MLS board and write response to database
* Dep - Create API using data from database
* Dev - GET request from API, create webpage using that data
* QA - Selenium to automatically test webpage across different browsers
* PM - Create a View for this job chain, set email alerts when job is broken

Example integration test in a department (Data)

* Install and use plugins - Poll GitHub for repo changes
* Run unit tests, integration tests
* Run scripts on server (groovy)

## Final Notes

If it’s important, it needs to be continuously tested.

* “Code without tests is bad code. It doesn’t matter how well written it is; 
   it doesn’t matter how pretty or object-oriented or well-encapsulated it is.
   With tests, we can change the behavior of our code quickly and verifiably” - Michael C Feathers
* Needs to be a top down decision to enforce tests - no PRs accepted unless there’s a test

Try Jenkins

* Install locally via Jenkins installation page and/or use Jenkins Dockerfile

