---
layout: post
title: Startup School

---


# {{ page.title }}

## Building a Product

What is the problem you're solving?

* You have to know what problem you're solving
* You should be able to describe what you're solving in one sentence
* Have you yourself experienced the problem that you're solving
* Can you define this problem narrowly? Know the use case
* Is the problem solvable?

Who is your customer?

* Not everyone should be your customer (figure out ideal first customer)
* How often do they have the problem? E.g. frequency of buying a car (infrequent) vs selling a car (frequent)
* How intense is the problem?
* Are users willing to pay? If you want to know if its a good problem to solve, make it a little 
  harder to use (e.g have a price or a slightly higher price)
* How easy is it to find your customers?

Does your MVP solve your problem?

* Build quickly (e.g. in two weeks) and test by giving your product to customers - will minimize product drift
* You'll have a bad product and in turn will find your more desperate customers
* If you're not dealing with desparate customers, you're doing it wrong
* Whose business will go out of business without you

Identify bad customers

* Constantly complaining
* Unrealistic expectations

Setup Metrics

* Use Google Analytics AND something else (e.g. for identifying actions)
* Google Analytics is good for knowing how many people visited
* GA is not good at identifying actions done (e.g. clicked on this button)
* You want an event-space metrics product (e.g. mixpanel, amplitude, heap)
* With something like __Mixpanel__, you'll know what people clicked on, how they used the site
* Pick 5-10 important metrics (e.g. for Instagram, opened the app, created an account, shared a photo, applied an effect)
* Make measurement a part of your product spec
* Almost always measurement should be _revenue_ (if you charge money), otherwise number of users (if you don't charge money)
* Measurement is __Key Performance Indicator (KPI)__

