---
layout: post
title: Hive
---


# {{ page.title }}

# Concepts

What is __Hive__? Hive is a data warehousing infrastructure based on Apache Hadoop (a scalable data storage
and data processing system using commodity hardware). Hive lets you do ad-hoc querying and data analysis with
custom functionality using __User Defined Functions (UDFs)__. Hive is not designed for online transaction
processing, but instead is best for traditional data warehousing tasks.

## Components

Hive organizes data into the following components:

* __Databases__ - Namespaces function to avoid name conflict for tables, views, partitions
* __Tables__ - a group of rows of data that have the same schema
* __Partitions__ - each table has one or more partition keys, which determines how the data is stored
  Speeds up analysis of large sets of data
* __Buckets__ (aka __Clusters__) - data in each partition may be divided into buckets based on a hash function

Note: Not necessary for tables to be partitioned or bucketed, but if done correctly can result in faster query execution

## Install

For local development on Mac:

* Install Java 7 (I had to use a lower version of Java)
* `brew install hive`
* My Hive home is in `/usr/local/Cellar/hive/3.1.1/libexec`
* I copied the `hive-default.xml.template` from `/usr/local/Cellar/hive/3.1.1/libexec/conf` to `hive-site.xml`
* I edited the file so that I'd have local options

### hive-site.xml

MySQL

    $ mysql
    mysql> CREATE DATABASE metastore;
    mysql> USE metastore;
    mysql> CREATE USER 'hiveuser'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'hivepassword';
    mysql> GRANT SELECT,INSERT,UPDATE,DELETE,ALTER,CREATE ON metastore.* TO 'hiveuser'@'localhost';

The configs for hive. You will need to set this up locally (e.g. for MySQL):

* `javax.jdo.option.ConnectionURL` value might be `jdbc:mysql://localhost/test?useUnicode=true&amp;useJDBCCompliantTimezoneShift=true&amp;useLegacyDatetimeCode=false&amp;serverTimezone=UTC`
* `javax.jdo.option.ConnectionDriverName` value might be `com.mysql.jdbc.Driver`
* `datanucleus.schema.autoCreateAll` to `true`

Add the following to `hive-site.xml`

    <property>
      <name>system:java.io.tmpdir</name>
      <value>/tmp/hive/java</value>
    </property>
    <property>
      <name>system:user.name</name>
      <value>${user.name}</value>
    </property>

## Debug

If there is an issue, you can run in debug mode:

    hive -hiveconf hive.root.logger=DEBUG,console

## Types

Types can be found here: https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/Hive/LanguageManual+Types

__Primitive Types__ can be:

* Number (e.g. `DOUBLE`, `FLOAT`, `BIGINT`, `INT`, `SMALLINT`, `TINYINT`)
* Boolean
* String (e.g. `STRING`, `VARCHAR`, `CHAR`)

__Complex Types__ can be:

* __Structs__ - elements within the type can be accessed using DOT (`.`) notation. E.g. Column `c` with data `{a INT; b INT}`
  can access field `a` with `c.a`
* __Maps__ - are __key-value tuples__ where the elements are accessed using `['element name']` notation. E.g.
  map `M` has a mapping from `group` -> `gid` the gid value can be accessed using `M['group']`
* __Arrays__ - are __indexable lists__, where the elements in the array have to be the same type. Elements are accessed
  using the `[n]` notation where `n` is an index (zero-based) into the array. For examplel `elements['a', 'b', 'c']`
  has `A[1]` return `b`.

### Operators on Complex Types

Array - `A[n]` - returns the nth element in the array
Maps - `M[key]` returns the value in key
Structs - `S.x` returns x field of struct S

## Functions

To see the operators and functions, run the following:

    SHOW FUNCTIONS;
    DESCRIBE FUNCTION <function_name>;
    DESCRIBE FUNCTION EXTENDED <function_name>;

### Built-in Functions

Build in functions include:

* `regex_replace(string A, string B, string C)` returns the string resulting from replacing all substrings in B that
  match the Java regular expression syntax
* `cast(<expr> as <type>)` converts the results of the expression to a type (e.g. `cast('1' AS BIGINT)`
* `get_json_object(string json_string, string path)` extracts the JSON object from a JSON string based on the
  path specified and returns JSON string of the extracted JSON object. Returns NULL if the input json string is invalid.

### User-Defined Functions

Normal __user-defined functions__ (e.g. `concat()`), take in a single input row and output a single output row.

#### Built-in Table-Generating Functions (UDTF)

__Table-generating functions__ transform a single input row to multiple output rows.
https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/Hive/LanguageManual+UDF

For example:

* `explode(ARRAY <T> a)` explodes an array to multiple rows (one row for each element from the array)
* `explode(MAP<Tkey,Tvalue>m)` explodes a map to multiple rows. Returns a row-set with a two columns (key, value), one
  row for each key-value pair from the input map
* `posexplode(ARRAY<T> a)` explodes an array to multiple rows with additional positional column of int type
  (position of items in the original array, starting with 0). Returns a row-set with two columns (pos, val), one row
  for each element from the array
* `inline(ARRAY<STRUCT<f1:T1...fn:Tn>> a)` explodes an array of structs to multiple rows
* `stack` breaks up n values into r rows. Each row will have n/r columns
* `json_tuple` takes JSON string and a set of n keys, and returns a tuple of n values

These are often used with `LATERAL VIEW`

## Running Hive

Just type in `hive` and then you can run your queries

    hive> show tables;

