---
layout: post
title: Ruby
---


# {{ page.title }}

# Summary

Ruby is an object-oriented programming language. A few things to know:

* Ruby is interpreted - you don't need a compiler
* Ruby is object-oriented, meaning it allows users to manipulate dat structures called objects.
  Everything in Ruby is an object
* Ruby files end in a `.rb` (e.g. `myrubyfile.rb`)

# Install Ruby

For Ubuntu

    sudo apt-get install ruby`ruby -e 'puts RUBY_VERSION[/\d+\.\d+/]'`-dev
    sudo apt-get install ruby-dev

# Ruby Environment Manager

## Ruby Version Manager (RVM)

Install RVM here: https://rvm.io/

Install GPG keys:

    $gpg2 --recv-keys 409B6B1796C275462A1703113804BB82D39DC0E3 7D2BAF1CF37B13E2069D6956105BD0E739499BDB

Install RVM with default Ruby and Rails in one command

    $\curl -sSL https://get.rvm.io | bash -s stable --rails

Go through the rest of the install and you'll be able to:

    rvm list # basically pip freeze

# RubyGems

Install

    sudo apt-get install rubygems

    gem list
    gem search [gem_name]
    gem install my_gem
    gem uninstall my_gem
    gem server  # to start up server to show what gems are installed

# Interactive Ruby (REPL)

You can run `irb` to get into an interactive ruby session using a unix environment

    $irb

This is the equivalent of typing `python`

## Pry

Pry is a runtime developer console and IRB alternative with introspection capabilities.

Install Pry

    sudo apt-get install pry 
    gem install pry --user-install

Using Pry

    require 'pry'
    # Misc code
    binding.pry

To run a program with pry, use:

    ruby -rpry myrubyprogram.rb

Example usage (basically `binding.pry` is the Python `pdb.set_trace()` equivalent)

    william.liu@us-wliu ~/workspace/ruby-examples/ruby_lang (master) $ ruby -rpry pry_example.rb

    From: /Users/william.liu/workspace/ruby-examples/ruby_lang/pry_example.rb @ line 15 :

        10: x = 10
        11:
        12: # start a REPL session
        13: binding.pry
        14:
     => 15: puts "Program will resume here. Value of x is: #{x}."
        16:
        17: puts "End here!"

    [1] pry(main)> ls
    self.methods: inspect  to_s
    locals: _  __  _dir_  _ex_  _file_  _in_  _out_  _pry_  a  x
    [2] pry(main)> puts a
    #<A:0x007fcc981925f0>
    => nil
    [3] pry(main)> a
    => #<A:0x007fcc981925f0>
    [4] pry(main)> exit
    Program will resume here. Value of x is: 10.
    End here!

Pry Help to see a list of commands inside of pry:

    $ pry
    [1] pry(main)> help
    Help
      help               Show a list of commands or information about a specific command.

    Context
      cd                 Move into a new context (object or scope).
      find-method        Recursively search for a method within a class/module or the current namespace.
      ls                 Show the list of vars and methods in the current scope.
      pry-backtrace      Show the backtrace for the pry session.
      raise-up           Raise an exception out of the current pry instance.
      reset              Reset the repl to a clean state.
      watch              Watch the value of an expression and print a notification whenever it changes.
      whereami           Show code surrounding the current context.
      wtf?               Show the backtrace of the most recent exception.

    Editing
      /^\s*!\s*$/        Clear the input buffer.
      amend-line         Amend a line of input in multi-line mode.
      edit               Invoke the default editor on a file.
      hist               Show and replay readline history.
      play               Playback a string variable, method, line, or file as input.
      show-input         Show the contents of the input buffer for the current multi-line expression.

    Introspection
      ri                 View ri documentation.
      show-doc           Show the documentation for a method or class.
      show-source        Show the source for a method or class.
      stat               View method information and set _file_ and _dir_ locals.

    Gems
      gem-cd             Change working directory to specified gem's directory.
      gem-install        Install a gem and refresh the gem cache.
      gem-list           List and search installed gems.
      gem-open           Opens the working directory of the gem in your editor.
      gem-readme         Show the readme bundled with a rubygem
      gem-search         Search for a gem with the rubygems.org json api
      gem-stat           Show the statistics of a gem (requires internet connection)

    Commands
      import-set         Import a pry command set.
      install-command    Install a disabled command.

    Aliases
      !!!                Alias for `exit-program`
      !!@                Alias for `exit-all`
      $                  Alias for `show-source`
      (?-mix:whereami[!?]+) Alias for `whereami`
      ?                  Alias for `show-doc`
      @                  Alias for `whereami`
      clipit             Alias for `gist --clip`
      file-mode          Alias for `shell-mode`
      history            Alias for `hist`
      quit               Alias for `exit`
      quit-program       Alias for `exit-program`
      reload-method      Alias for `reload-code`
      show-method        Alias for `show-source`

    Byebug
      backtrace          Display the current stack.
      break              Set or edit a breakpoint.
      continue           Continue program execution and end the pry session.
      down               Move current frame down.
      finish             Execute until current stack frame returns.
      frame              Move to specified frame #.
      next               Execute the next line within the current stack frame.
      step               Step execution into the next line or method.
      up                 Move current frame up.

    Input and output
      .<shell command>   All text following a '.' is forwarded to the shell.
      cat                Show code from a file, pry's input buffer, or the last exception.
      change-inspector   Change the current inspector proc.
      change-prompt      Change the current prompt.

Good commands to know:

* `help`
* `ls --help`
* `ls`, `ls some_object`
* `cd`
* `whereami`
* `some_object.inspect`
* `some_object.class`
* `show-method some_function`
* `edit some_function`  # or some class method, e.g. `edit String#my_func`
* `.ls`
* `.cat`
* `.pwd`

# Debug

## Embedded Ruby Debugger

    $ruby -r debug filename

Example Run debugger with:

    $ruby -r debug my_ruby_file.rb

List of debug commands

* `v l` to view local variables
* `v g` to view global variables
* `w` to display stack frame

## p and puts

`p` is a more detailed print (more suitable for debugging) because you can tell the difference
between a `1`, `"1"` and `"2\b1"`.

### puts

Basically, this is printing out the info you need

    put myobject
    puts caller  # generate a backtrace without raising an exception
    puts object.methods  # list all methods of an object

### print

Print an object (without a new line)

### p

`p myobject` is basically `prints myobject.inspect` followed by a newline.

## byebug

Install

    gem install byebug

## dir() equivalent

Inspect an object with:

    my_object.class
    "MyStringObject".methods.sort
    my_object.instance_of? String  #=> True
    my_object.is_a?(String)

## Methods

You can remove an object's methods, e.g.

    >my_object.methods
    :public_foo, :public_bar

    >my_object.methods-Object.methods
    :something, :another

## pry-byebug

github.com/deivid-rodriguez/pry-byebug

    $gem install pry-byebug --user-install

## Debugging with IntelliJ RubyMine


# Installing gems

__Gems__ is the equivalent of python pip.

    gem install my_gem --user-install

## Comments

    # Single line comments

    =begin
        Multi line comments 
    =end

# Example Code

Here is a class called `Person` with a name and age

    class Person
      attr_accessor :name, :age
    
      def initialize(name, age)
        @name = name
        @age  = age.to_i


Let's break this down:

* `class` means we're defining a Class
* `attr_accessor` is the shortcut to `attr_reader` and `attr_writer` put together, meaning can read and write
* `$` means a variable that has global scope
* `@` means a variable that has instance scope (i.e. shared by all instances of this class)
* `@@` means a variable that has class scope
* `puts` means put on the screen
* `"Will".reverse` returns the reverse of the string Will

# Strings

Double quote or single quote (go double quote)

    puts "Add Them #{4 + 5} \n\n"
    # Outputs: Add Them 9

    puts 'Add Them #{4 + 5} \n\n'
    # Outputs: Add Them #{4 + 5} \n\n
    # So don't use single quotes on strings

Note: The `#{4 + 5}` is called __interpolation__

Multiline strings

    multiline_string = <<EOM
    This is a very long string
    that contains interpolation
    like #{4 + 5} \n\n
    EOM
    puts multiline_string

    # Outputs
    This is a very long string
    that contains interpolation
    like 9

## String Methods

    first_name = "William"
    last_name = "Liu
    full_name = first_name + last_name

    puts full_name.include?("Liu")
    puts full_name.size
    puts "Vowels : " + full_name.count("aeiou").to_s
    puts "Consonants: " + full_name.count("^aeiou").to_s  # looks for opposite
    puts full_name.start_with?("Will")
    puts full_name.length
    puts "Index: " + full_name.index("Liu")
    puts full_name.upcase
    puts full_name.downcase
    puts full_name.lstrip
    puts full_name.rstrip
    puts full_name.strip
    puts full_name.rjust(20, '.')  # makes string 20 spaces with `.` to fill in
    puts full_name.ljust(20, '.')  # makes string 20 spaces with `.` to fill in
    puts full_name.chop  # removes trailing newline characters
    puts full_name.delete("a")  # deletes every occurrence of 'a'
    name_array = full_name.split(//)  # split every new character into an array
    name_array = full_name.split(/ /)  # split every space into an array

# Symbols

__Symbols__ are like strings, except you can't change the value of a symbol and
you don't need a string method. Symbols are used for things like keys inside hashes because 
they're much faster.

    :will
    puts :will
    puts :will.to_s  # will
    puts :will.class  # Symbol
    puts :will.object_id  # 933628

Symbols are used a lot in Ruby, e.g.

    attr_accessor :name, :weight

# Special Characters

After a method, you might see a `?` (e.g. `include?`). You might 
also see a `!` (meaning this is an unusual version of the method).

    ? - check if true/false for object
    ! - used for methods that raise an exception when the method without does not
        e.g. `save` and `save!` in ActiveRecord

## ?

`?` are __predicate procedures__. `?` always returns a boolean value.

## !

`!` are __mutation procedures__, which store values into previously allocated locations.
I.e. Things are modified.

`!` indicates a __dangerous method__ as opposed to a __safe method__ (without bang).
The `!` indicates that the method will modify the object it's called on.

    foo = "A STRING"  # a string called foo
    foo.downcase!  # modifies foo itself
    puts foo    # prints the modified foo: 'a string'

For Ruby on Rails, the bang means:

* It's not necessary to save the object after calling the method
* When you call the method, the db is going to be changed

# Arrays

    array_1 = Array.new  # prints nothing
    array_2 = Array.new(5) # prints nothing 5 times
    array_3 = Array.new(5, "empty")  # prints 'empty' 5 times
    array_4 = [1, "two", 3, 5.5]  # prints 1, two, 3, 5.5
    puts array_4[2]  # 3
    puts array_4[2,2].join(", ")  # 3, 5.5
    puts array_4.values_at(0,1,3).join(", ")  # 1, two, 5.5
    array_4.unshift(0)  # add a value (in this case: 0) to the beginning of the array
    array_4.shift() # remove first item in the array
    array_4.push(100,200)  # add two values to the end of the array
    array_4.pop # remove last element of the array
    array_4.concat([10,20,30])  # add 10,20,30 to the end of the array
    puts "Array Size: " + array_4.size().to_s
    puts "Array contains 100 : " + array_4.include?(100).to_s
    puts "How many 100s : " + array_4.count(100).to_s
    puts "Array Empty : " + array_4.empty?.to_s
    p array_4  # prints out entire array

    array_4.each do |value|  # loops through all values and temporarily places to temp 'value'
      puts value
    end

# Hashes

    number_hash = {"PI" => 3.14,
                   "Golden" => 1.618,
                   "e" => 2.718}

    puts number_hash["PI"]  # 3.14
    superheroes = Hash["Clark Kent", "Superman", 
                       "Bruce Wayne", "Batman"]
    puts superheroes["Clark Kent"]  # Superman
    superheroes["Barry Allen"] = "Flash"  # Assign a new key and value

    samp_hash = Hash.new("No Such Key")  # default key
    puts samp_hash["Dog"]  # No Such Key

    superheroines = Hash["Lisa Morel", "Aquagirl",
                         "Betty Kane", "Batgirl"]
    superheroes.update(superheroines)  # A destructive merge - eliminates duplicates, normally use this
    superheroes.merge(superheroines)  # Non destructive merge - does not eliminate duplicates

    superheroes.each do |key, value|
      puts key.to_s + " : " + value
    end
    # Clark Kent : Superman
    # Bruce Wayne : Batman
    # Barry Allen : Flash
    # Lisa Morel : Aquagirl
    # Betty Kane : Batgirl

    puts "Has Key Lisa Morel " + superheroes.has_key?("Lisa Morel")
    puts "Has Value Batman " + superheroes.has_value?("Batman")
    puts "Is Hash Empty " + superheroes.empty?.to_s
    puts "Size of Hash " + superheroes.size.to_s
    
    superheroes.delete("Barry Allen")  # deletes key

# Enumerable

    Class Menu
      include Enumerable

      def each
        yield "pizza"
        yield "spaghetti"
        yield "salad"
        yield "water"
        yield "bread"
      end
    end

    menu_options = Menu.new

    menu_options.each do |item|
      puts "would you like : #{item}"
    end

    p menu_options.find(|item| item = "pizza"}  # "pizza"
    p menu_options.select {|item| item.size <= 5}  # select items <= 5 chars  ["pizza", "salad", "water", "bread"]
    p menu_options.reject {|item| item.size <= 5}  # "[spaghetti"]
    p menu_options.first  # "pizza"
    p menu_options.take(2)  # ["pizza", "spaghetti"]
    p menu_options.drop(2)
    p menu_options.min  # based off numbers or alpha - "bread"
    p menu_options.max  # "water"
    p menu_options.sort
    menu_options.reverse_each {|item| puts item}

# Class

A simple class without getter or setting functions

## animal.rb

    class Animal
      def initialize
        puts "Creating a New Animal"
      end

      def set_name(new_name)
        @name = new_name
      end

      def get_name
        @name
      end

      def name
        @name
      end

      def name=(new_name)
        if new_name.is_a?(Numeric)
          puts "Name Can't Be a Number"
        else
          @name = new_name
        end
      end
    end

    cat = Animal.new
    cat.set_name("Peekaboo")
    puts cat.get_name
    puts cat.name
    cat.name = "Messi"
    puts cat.name

## dog.rb

A Dog Class with `attr_reader`, `attr_writer`, `attr_accessor`

    class Dog
      attr_accessor :name, :height, :weight
        
      def bark
        return "Generic Bark"
      end
    end

    rover = Dog.new
    rover.name = "Rover"
    puts rover.name

## Class Inheritance

Here we override the `bark` method

    class GermanShepard < Dog
      def bark
        return "Loud Bark"
      end
    end

    max = GermanShepard.new
    max.name = "Max"  # name is inheriated from Dog
    printf "%s goes %s \n", max.name, max.bark()

# Modules

Modules are made up of methods and instance variables like Classes, except you cannot instantiate Modules.
Modules add functionality to a Class. You can inherit multiple modules.

## human.rb

    module Human
      attr_accessor :name, :height, :weight

      def run
        puts self.name + " runs"
      end
    end

## smart.rb

    module Smart
      def act_smart
        return "E = mc^2"
      end
    end

## relative import

    require_relative "human"
    require_relative "smart"

    module Animal
      def make_sound
        puts "Grrr"
      end
    end

    class Dog
      include Animal
    end

    rover = Dog.new
    rover.make_sound

    class Scientist
      include Human
      prepend Smart  # Smart act_smrt will supercede the below act_smart since its prepended instead of include
    
      def act_smart
        return "E = mc something"
      end
    end

    einstein = Scientist.new
    einstain.name = "Albert"
    puts einstein.name
    einstein.run
    puts einstein.name

## Polymorphism

Polymorphism works a little different in Ruby than other languages.
Statically typed languages uses __duck typing__ (if it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck,
then it must be a duck); basically, an object's suitability is determined by the presence of certain
methods and properties instead of the object type.

    class Bird
      def tweet(bird_type)
        bird_type.tweet
      end
    end

    class Cardinal < Bird
      def tweet
        puts "Tweet Tweet"
      end
    end

    class Parrot < Bird
      def tweet
        puts "Squawk"
      end
    end

    generic_bird = Bird.new
    generic_bird.tweet(Cardinal.new)  # Tweet Tweet
    generic_bird.tweet(Parrot.new)  # Squawk

# Iteration

## for-loop

    numbers = [1,2,3,4,5]
    for number in numbers:
      puts "#{number},"  # use print if you don't want a newline
    end

    # Result
    1,
    2,
    3,
    4,
    5,

## loop

    x = 1

    loop do
      x += 1
      next unless (x % 2) == 0
      puts x

      break if x >= 10
    end

    # Results
    2
    4
    6
    8
    10


## while

    y = 1
    while y <= 10
      y += 1
      next unless (y % 2) == 0
      puts y
    end 

    # Results 
    2
    4
    6
    8
    10

# Functions

    def add_nums(num_1, num_2)  # variables are passed by value
      return num_1.to_i + num_2.to_i  # returns to integer
    end

    puts add_nums(3, 4)  # 7

# Exceptions

## rescue

Rescue is a catchall

    print "Enter a Number : "
    first_num = gets.to_i
    print "Enter Another Number : "
    second_num = gets.to_i

    begin
      answer = first_num / second_num
    
    rescue # this is called if there's an error
      puts "You cannot divide by zero"
      exit
    end 

    puts "#{first_num} / #{second_num} = #{answer}"

## raise

Raise is a specific rescue

    def check_age(age)
      raise ArgumentError, "Enter Positive Number" unless age > 0
    end

    begin
      check_age(-1)
    rescue ArgumentError
      puts "That is an impossible age"
    end

# Files

    file = File.new("authors.out", "w")
    file.puts "William Shakespeare"
    file.puts "Agatha Christie"
    file.puts "Barbara Cartland"
    file.close
    puts File.read("authors.out")

    file = File.new("authors.out", "a")  # append
    file.puts "Danielle Steel"
    file.close
    puts File.read("authors.out")

    file = File.new("authors_info.out", "w")
    file.puts "William Shakespeare,English,plays and poetry,4 billion"
    file.puts "Agatha Christie,English,who done its,4 billion"
    file.puts "Barbara Cartland,English,romance novels,1 billion"
    file.puts "Danielle Steel,English,romance novels,800 million"
    file.close

    File.open("authors_info.out") do |record|
      record.each do |item|
        name, lang, specialty, sales = item.chomp.split(',')
        puts "#{name} was an #{lang} author that specialized in #{specialty} with #{sales} sales"
      end
    end

# Setup IntelliJ with Ruby

* Make sure to setup 'Project Settings' > 'Project' to point to the correct SDK
* Make sure to setup 'Modules' > 'Add Content Root' if you have multiple projects (e.g. one project in another folder
  references outside that project)
* When picking 'Modules', do ues JRuby (use Ruby)   
* Use 'Script Arguments' (not 'Ruby arguments') when setting up Configurations

# Linting with Rubocop

Install with `gem install rubocop`

Lint with `rubocop` (can pass in files or it'll check that current dir)
