---
layout: post
title: React
---


# {{ page.title }}

## Summary

What is React? React is a declarative JavaScript library for building user interfaces.
We are able to build complex UIs from small, isolated pieces of code called 'components'.
These components tell us what we want to see on the screen. React handles the update and
re-render of components.

### Example

An example of a component is `React.Component` subclasses:

    class ShoppingList extends React.Component {
      render() {
        return (
          <div className="shopping-list">
            <h1>Shopping List for {this.props.name}</h1>
            <ul>
              <li>Instagram</li>
              <li>WhatsApp</li>
              <li>Oculus</li>
            </ul>
          </div>
        );
      }
    }

    // Example usage: <ShoppingList name="Mark" />

So what does this mean? `ShoppingList` is a __React component class__ (akak __React component type__).
A component takes in parameters (`props`, aka 'properties') and returns a hierarchy of views to display
via the `render` method.

The `render` method returns a description of what you want to see on the screen. React takes this description
and displays the result, which is a __React element__ (lightweight description of what to render).

React uses a special syntax called `JSX` which makes these structures easier to write. The `<div />` syntax
is transformed at build time to `React.createElement('div')`. The example above turns into:

    return React.createElement('div', {className: 'shopping-list'},
      React.createElement('h1', /* ... h1 children ... */),
      React.createElement('ul', /* ... ul children ... */)
    );

## Top-level API

https://reactjs.org/docs/react-api.html

If you load React from a `<script>` tag, then these top-level APIs are available on the `React` global.

    #ES6 with npm
    import React from 'react'

    #ES5 with npm
    var React = require('react')


## Tools

Google Chrome Extensions has a 'React Developer Tools' extension
With this, in Chrome DevTools, you can click on the 'Components' section to look at React Components.

## JSX

JSX is the syntax extension to JavaScript. We use JSX with React to describe what the UI
should look like. JSX produces React 'elements'. It looks like this:

    const element = <h1>Hello world!</h1>

The idea is that React separates _concerns_ with loosely coupled units called _components_.

    const name = 'Will'
    const element = <h1>Hello {name}</h1>;

    ReactDOM.render(
        element,
        document.getElementById('root')
    );

You can put any type of JavaScript expressions inside the curly braces in JSX (https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Expressions_and_Operators#Expressions)

Note: Recommend using the 'Babel' language definition for your editor for proper syntax highlighting
For VSCode, that means installing the extension 'vscode-language-babel'

## Elements

Elements are the smallest building blocks for React apps. An element describes what you see on the screen.
React DOM handles updating the DOM to match the React elements. React's components are made up of a lot of elements.

    const element = <h1>Hello world</h1>

We normally have a single 'root' DOM node because everything inside it will be managed by React DOM.
To render a React element into a root DOM node, pass both to `ReactDOM.render()`, like:

    # Say we have this in your HTML file
    <div id="root"></div>

    # call this to render element into DOM
    const element = <h1>Hello world</h1>;
    ReactDOM.render(element, document.getElementById('root'));

### Updating a rendered element

React elements are _immutable_; once you create the elmenet, you cannot changes its children or attributes.
The only way to update the UI is to create a new element and pass it to `ReactDOM.render()`.

    function tick() {
      const element = (
        <div>
          <h1>Hello world</h1>
          <h2>It is {new Date().toLocaleTimeString()}.</h2>
        </div>
      );
      ReactDOM.render(element, document.getElementById('root'));
    }

    setInterval(tick, 1000);  # call the render every second

Even though we describe the whole UI tree each tick, React only updates the content that has changed (if any).

## Components and Props

Components lets you split the UI into independent reusable pieces. Components can be defined as either
classes or functions (with classes providing more features). To define a React component, you need to
extend `React.Component`. For reference, the component API is here: https://reactjs.org/docs/react-component.html

### Component (as class)

Here it is as a class

    class Welcome extends React.Component {
      render() {
        return <h1>Hello {this.props.name}</h1>
      }
    }

The only method you have to define in a `React.Component` sublcass is the `render()` method.
The idea is that code reuse is primarily done through composition rather than inheritance.

### Component (as function)

Here it is as a function (aka __function components__)

    function Welcome(props) {
      return <h1>Hello {props.name}</h1>
    }

This is a valid React component because it accepts a single 'props' (properties) object argument
with data and returns a React element.

### Rendering a Component

Elements can be:

* __DOM tags__
* __user-defined components__

See examples below:

    # DOM tag
    const element = <div />;

    # user-defined component
    const element = <Welcome name="Will" />;

When React sees an element representing a user-defined component, it passes JSX attributes and children
to this component as a single object (aka 'props').

#### Example

Here we render a 'Hello Will' on the page:

    function Welcome(props) {
      return <h1>Hello {props.name}</h1>;
    }
    const element = <Welcome name="Will" />;
    ReactDOM.render(
      element,
      document.getElementById('root')
    );

Here's what is happening:

* `React.Render()` is called with the element `<Welcome name="Will" />`
* React calls the `Welcome` component with the properties `{name: 'Will'}` as the props
* The `Welcome` component returns a `<h1>Hello Will</h1>` element as the result
* React DOM updates the DOM to match `<h1>Hello Will</h1>`

Note: Always start a component name with a _capital_ letter. Starting with a lowercase letter
means that this gets interpreted as a DOM tag instead of a component.

#### Components referring to components

Your components can refer to other components in their output. This gives us the same component abstraction
for any level of deatil. Everything (a button, a form, a screen) are all expressed as components.
For this example, we have an `App` component that renders multiple `Welcome` components:

    function Welcome(props) {
      return <h1>Hello {props.name}</h1>;
    }

    function App() {
      return (
        <div>
          <Welcome name="Sara" />
          <Welcome name="Cahal" />
          <Welcome name="Edite" />
        </div>
      );
    }

    ReactDOM.render(
      <App />,
      document.getElementById('root')
    );


## State

You can convert a function into a component class by calling it a class, adding a `render()` method,
and replacing `props` with `this.props` like so:

    class Clock extends React.Component {
      render() {
        return (
          <div>
            <h1>Hello world</h1>
            <h2>It is {this.props.date.toLocaleTimeString()}.</h2>
          </div>
        );
      }
    }

To add state, we add a _class constructor_ that assigns the inital `this.state`

    class Clock extends React.Component {
      constructor(props) {
        super(props);  /* You always want to call the base constructor with props) */
        this.state = {date: new Date()};
      }

      render() {
        return (
          <div>
            <h1>Hello world</h1>
            <h2>It is {this.props.date.toLocaleTimeString()}.</h2>
          </div>
        );
      }
    }

Instead of updating based off a time (e.g. every 1 second update DOM), we use lifecyle methods
(see 'Lifecycle'):

    class Clock extends React.Component {
      constructor(props) {
        super(props);
        this.state = {date: new Date()};
      }

      componentDidMount() {
        /* runs after the component output has been rendered to the DOM */
        this.timerID = setInterval(
          () => this.tick(),
          1000
        );
      }

      componentWillUnmount() {
        /*  runs tear down code */
        clearInterval(this.timerID);
      }

      tick() {
        this.setState({
          date: new Date()
        });
      }

      render() {
        return (
          <div>
            <h1>Hello, world!</h1>
            <h2>It is {this.state.date.toLocaleTimeString()}.</h2>
          </div>
        );
      }
    }

    ReactDOM.render(
      <Clock />,
      document.getElementById('root')
    );

So what's going on?

1 The `<Clock />` component is passed to `ReactDOM.render()` where React calls the constructor method.
2 The `constructor` method initializes `this.state` with an object (the current time)
3 React calls the `Clock` component's `render()` method and React updates the DOM to match the render output
4 When the `Clock` output is inserted into the DOM, React calls the `componentDidMount()` lifecycle method
5 Inside this method, `Clock` asks the browser to set up a timer to call the component's `tick()` method once a second
6 Each second the browser calls the `tick()` method and the `Clock` component schedules a UI update by calling
  `setState()` with an object containing the current time. The `setState()` call lets React know that the
  state has changed so it calls `render()` method again to see what should be drawn (using the new `this.state.date`)
7 If the `Clock` component is removed from the DOM, then React calls `componentWillUnmount()` method

### Rules about State

Some rules about state:

Set state with `setState()`

* do not modify state directly (e.g. `this.state.comment = 'Something'` is wrong)
* instead, use `setState()` function (e.g. `this.setState({comment: 'Hello'});`)
* the only place where you can assign `this.state` is in the constructor

State updates may be asynchronous

* React batches multiple `setState()` calls into a single update for performance
* That means `this.props` and `this.state` may be updated asynchronously so you should not rely on their values
  for calculating the next state
* Use the form of `setState()` that accepts a function rather than an object; that funtion will receive the
  previous state as the first argument and the props at the time the update is applied as the second argument

For example:

    // Wrong
    this.setState({
      counter: this.state.counter + this.props.increment,
    });

    // Correct
    this.setState((state, props) => ({
      counter: state.counter + props.increment
    }));

## Lifecycle

Each component has several 'lifecycle methods' that you can override to run code at particular times in the process.
The Lifecycle Cheat sheet is here: https://projects.wojtekmaj.pl/react-lifecycle-methods-diagram/
The main lifecycle methods are for:

* mounting
* updating
* unmounting

#### Mounting

These methods are called in this order when a component is created and inserted into the DOM:

* `constructor()`
* `static getDerivedStateFromProps()` (not used often)
* `render()`
* `componentDidMount()`

#### Updating

An update is caused by changes to props or state. These methods are called in the following order when a component
is being re-rendered:

* `static getDerivedStateFromProps()` (not used often)
* `shouldComponentUpdate()` (not used often)
* `render()`
* `getSnapshotBeforeUpdate()` (not used often)
* `componentDidUpdate()`

#### Unmounting

This method is called when a component is being removed from the DOM:

* `componentWillUnmount()`

### render() method

The `render()` method is the only required method in a class component.
When called, it should examine `this.props` and `this.state` and return one of the following types:

* React elements (usually through JSX), e.g. `<div />` or `<mycomponent />`
* Arrays and fragments (return multiple elements from render)
* Portals - lets you render children into a different DOM subtree
* Strings and numbers (i.e. text nodes in the DOM)
* Booleans or null (i.e. renders nothing)

Renders should not modify component state and should return the same results each time it's invoked

