---
layout: post
title: Sidekiq
---


# {{ page.title }}

# About

Sidekiq is an open source scheduler written in Ruby. Sidekiq is commonly used with Ruby on Rails to handle
asynchronous tasks.

## Sidekiq Config

You should see a `Sidekiq.configure_client` where you can configure details like what the redis options are.

## Active Job

Rails 4.2 introduced Active Job, a standard interface for interacting with job runners. Active Job is a framework
to declare jobs and make them run on a variety of queuing backends (including Sidekiq, Resque, etc).

https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_job_basics.html

### Active Job - Queue Adapters

Queuing backends have a variety of features. For example:

https://api.rubyonrails.org/v6.0.2.1/classes/ActiveJob/QueueAdapters.html

    |                   | Async | Queues | Delayed    | Priorities | Timeout | Retries |
    |-------------------|-------|--------|------------|------------|---------|---------|
    | Backburner        | Yes   | Yes    | Yes        | Yes        | Job     | Global  |
    | Delayed Job       | Yes   | Yes    | Yes        | Job        | Global  | Global  |
    | Que               | Yes   | Yes    | Yes        | Job        | No      | Job     |
    | queue_classic     | Yes   | Yes    | Yes*       | No         | No      | No      |
    | Resque            | Yes   | Yes    | Yes (Gem)  | Queue      | Global  | Yes     |
    | Sidekiq           | Yes   | Yes    | Yes        | Queue      | No      | Job     |
    | Sneakers          | Yes   | Yes    | No         | Queue      | Queue   | No      |
    | Sucker Punch      | Yes   | Yes    | Yes        | No         | No      | No      |
    | Active Job Async  | Yes   | Yes    | Yes        | No         | No      | No      |
    | Active Job Inline | No    | Yes    | N/A        | N/A        | N/A     | N/A     |

### Active Job - Creating a job

With Active Job, you can create a job with:

`rails generate job my_cleanup` (` ---queue my_queue` if you want to also specify the queue).

This creates a job in `app/jobs` that looks like:

    class MyCleanupJob < ApplicationJob
      queue_as :default

      def perform(*guests)
        # Do something later
      end
    end

### Active Job - Enqueue the Job

You can enqueue the job a few different ways (depending on when you want it to run):

    MyCleanupJob.perform_later guest  # enqueues a job to be performed as soon as the queuing system is free
    MyCleanupJob.set(wait_until: Date.tomorrow.noon).perform_later(guest)  # enqueues job to run tomorrow at noon
    MyCleanupJob.perform_later(guest1, guest2, filter: 'some_filter')  # 'perform_now' and 'perform_later' calls 'perform'
    MyCleanupJob.set(queue: :some_queue).perform_later(record)  # set a specific queue for job to run on by using 'set'

### Active Job - Queues

With Active Job, you can schedule the job to run on a specific queue.

    class MyCleanupJob < ApplicationJob
      queue_as :low_priority
      #....
    end

You can run some logic to determine which queue the job gets sent to with `queue_as`
You can prefix the queue name for all your jobs under `config/application.rb`

### Active Job - Callbacks

Active Job provides hooks to trigger logic during the life cycle of a job.
You can implement the callbacks as ordinary methods and use a macro-style class method to register them as callbacks.

Available callbacks include:

* before_enqueue
* around_enqueue
* after_enqueue
* before_perform
* around_perform
* after_perform

These callbacks provide hooks to trigger logic during the life cycle of a job. You can implement the callbacks
as ordinary methods and a use a macro-style class method to register them as callbacks. For example:

    class MyCleanJob < ApplicationJob
      queue_as :default
      around_perform :around_perform

      def perform
        # Do Something later
      end

      private
        def around_cleanup
          # Do something before perform
          yield
          # Do something after perform
        end
    end

### Active Job - perform vs perform_async

When you run `perform` (e.g. `MyUser.new.perform(user.id)`), you execute the job immediately (i.e. runs synchronously).
With `perform_async`, you send your job to Sidekiq to run asynchronously.

When you run `perform_async`, Sidekiq persists the arguments to Redis as JSON. Complex Ruby oejcts do not convert
to JSON (by default will convert with `to_s`). Even if it did serialize correctly, your queue might back up and
your arguments are stale. Summary: Don't save state to Sidekiq, just save simple identifiers and instead look up
the objects you need in your perform method.

### Active Job - Redis

So if you use Redis as your queue backend, you can see what gets pushed and set.

    redis-cli monitor | grep -E "(hset|lpush)"

You will see messages like:

    lpush queue:default { class: ExampleSendToWorker, args: [a, b], retry: true, queue: default, jid:... }
    hset .... { queue: default, payload: {class: ExampleSendToWorker... }}

### Active Job - Testing your Jobs

https://guides.rubyonrails.org/testing.html#testing-jobs

###
