---
layout: post
title: Networks
---


# {{ page.title }}


## Terminology

* Network Device - e.g. a computer, a printer, a mobile device, a server
* Network Interface Card (NIC) - wired or wireless, each network device has this card (usually built in to the device)
  If wired device (instead of wireless), it will have a wire that connects to a physical **switch** of an **access point**.
  A typical connector on a NIC is an RJ45 connector (RJ = registered jack) used for Ethernet networks
* Access Point (AP) - a network device that is used to forward data to it's destination
* Router - a network device that creates and maintains a local area network (as well as moves data inside of that network)

E.g. Will is on a computer (network device) that is connected to a switch (wireless or wired), which forwards
the request to the router, it forwards to a firewall, then to another router, then to the internet (a service provider).

## Protocol Stack (aka Network Stack)

A protocol stack (aka network stack) is an implementation of a computer networking protocol suite.

* Application Layer - Web Service, File Service
* Transport Layer (Layer 4) - TCP (slower, but reliable) vs UDP (faster, best attempt only, not reliable)
  UDP = User Datagram Protocol
  TCP = Transmission Control Protocol
* Network Layer (Layer 3) - IP (Internet Protocol) Address (identify a specific device and on what network). IP Addresses added here. At this level, the Protocol data unit (PDU) is a **Packet**
* Data-link Layer (Layer 2) - MAC (Media Access Control) Address (aka physical address, ethernet address, hardware address). Each device has its own unique 12 hexadecimal identifier (e.g. `9C-35-5B-5F-4C-D7`, `0-F`). Ethernet addresses added here. At this level, the Protocol data unit (PDU) is a **Frame**
  Mac addresses are physically attached to a hardware device.
* Physical Layer (Layer 1)- Sending raw bit (0's, 1's) streams. At this level, the Protocol data unit (PDU) is **Bit** or **Symbol**

So how does this all come together? A user's computer might request data from a web server, the web service associates
tcp as the transport protocol (how to send data), we would add the IP address of the server, add the mac address and send those bits.

The above is called a **TCP/IP** protocol stack.

Example Application Layer Services:

### DNS (Domain Name Service)

An important app service is **DNS** (domain name service), which converts a domain name (like google.com) into an IP address.
DNS uses the Layer 4 Transport Protocol of UDP and has a destination port of port 53, a source port (e.g. say port number is > 1024 like 38777, randomly picked and assigned if it's not in use)
Think of the source port and destination port as an envelope with sender and destination address.

### HTTP web service

An example of a web app using HTTP uses the Layer 4 of TCP and a destination port 80 and say a source port of 1553.


## Troubleshooting Tools

In your CLI, you have a few tools to help troubleshoot:

* `ping` - Can rule out that DNS is working (e.g. `ping www.google.com`)
* protocol analyzer (e.g. Wireshark, to capture logs of where packets went)

ping tips, if we see that there's an IP address after the ping, we know at least DNS is working (doesn't
matter what the reply is).

```bash
ping google.com

Pinging google.com [142.250.69.238] with 32 bytes of data:
Reply from ...
```

### IP address and Layer 2 address

* `ipconfig` using `ipconfig /all` on windows

Has the information from `Ethernet adapater Ethernet 0:` with the `Physical Address` (aka layer 2 address)

* `ifconfig` (interface config) on mac/linux

Under `inet` (for ip address, e.g. 192.168.1.109) and `ether` for physical address (e.g. 00:15:5d:77:77:01)

## Address Resolution Protocol (ARP)

So how does say a computer (which has its own MAC address) know the MAC address of another device on the network?
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) helps discover another computer's Layer 2 address. For example:


Name of Computer | Layer 3 - IP Address | Layer 2 - MAC Address
Computer 2       | 10.1.0.10            | 00:15:5d:77:88:99
Internal Server  | 10.1.0.111           | 00:15:5d:67:83:22

Computer 2 basically asks (using Address Resolution Protocol) as a **broadcast** request what is using this IP Address (should only be one device that uses an IP address at a time), and if it's there, what is the Layer 2 address?

## Layer 2 Switching Fundamentals

A switch has a few ports that allow registered jacks to plugin in. When a switch starts up, the switch doesn't know
what devices are plugged into those ports. The switch will remember what MAC address with what Port. The switch remembers each MAC Address is at which port number.

A broadcast of `ffffffffffff` is a reserved address that says everyone needs to see this data (sends to every port in that local area network, e.g. an ARP request). Another case is `unknown unicast`, which means this frame is intended for only one specific mac address (but it's not sure where that mac address is).

## Internet Protocol (IP) ver 4 (IPv4)

An IP address looks like `#.#.#.#` where the numbers can range from 0-255. An example is say 10.1.0.10.
In the IP address, there are 2 parts:

1. the first part is the **Network Address** (think of it as the Street Address)
2. the second part is the **Host Address** (think of it as the House Address)

The left side is the Network Address and the remaining right side is the Host Address.
All of the devices on the same network starts with the same set of numbers.

So what's the dividing line between network address and host address?
The indicator on what separates the network address from the host address is the **mask** (subnet mask, network mask).

Say we have a mask of `255.255.0.0` and an IP of `10.1.0.10`. That means `10.1` is the network address and `0.10` is the host address.

## Layer 3 IP Routing

Say we have a `10.1` Network and a `10.2` Network. A user Will has his computer on `10.1.0.10` and wants to talk to
another device on the same `10.1` network. You can just specify that device and the switch will know.
However, if Will wants to talk to a different network `10.2` Network, we would have to go through a network device
called a **Router**.

If a computer cannot connect to the destination, you want to check 4 basic computer configuration elements:

* Does the user have the correct IP Address? (e.g. shows right network?)
* Does the computer have the right mask? (e.g. 255.255.0.0)
* Based on above, is the default gateway configured? What router do you forward frames to (for anything that goes to a remote network, i.e. another network)
* Is there a DNS server configured? (e.g. Google DNS is `8.8.8.8` or using a company specific DNS)

## Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP)

In order to setup automatic IP configuration on computers, we can use DHCP. Without DHCP, we would need to setup/update configs manually.
To setup DHCP, we setup a DHCP server where we can have specific **options** (e.g. DNS server, default gateway). When a client connects, we run through **DORA**:

* Discover
* Offer
* Request
* Ack



